A brain circuit and neuronal mechanism for decoding and adapting to change in
daylength
Maddaloni G1

, Chang YJ1

, Senft RA
1
, Dymecki SM1*
.

1Department of Genetics, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02115 MA, USA
Abstract
Changes in daylight amount (photoperiod) drive pronounced alterations in physiology and behaviour1,2

. Adaptive
responses to seasonal photoperiods are vital to all organisms – dysregulation is associated with disease, from
affective disorders3

to metabolic syndromes4

. Circadian rhythm circuitry has been implicated5,6 yet little is known
about the precise neural and cellular substrates that underlie phase synchronization to photoperiod change. Here
we present a previously unknown brain circuit and novel system of axon branch-specific and reversible
neurotransmitter deployment that together prove critical for behavioural and sleep adaptation to photoperiod
change. We found that the recently defined neuron type called mrEn1-Pet17

located in the mouse brainstem
Median Raphe Nucleus (MRN) segregates serotonin versus VGLUT3 (here proxy for the neurotransmitter
glutamate) to different axonal branches innervating specific brain regions involved in circadian rhythm and
sleep/wake timing8,9

. We found that whether measured during the light or dark phase of the day this branch-
specific neurotransmitter deployment in mrEn1-Pet1 neurons was indistinguishable; however, it strikingly

reorganizes on photoperiod change. Specifically, axonal boutons but not cell soma show a shift in neurochemical
phenotype upon change away from equinox light/dark conditions that reverses upon return to equinox. When we
genetically disabled the deployment of VGLUT3 in mrEn1-Pet1 neurons, we found that sleep/wake periods and
voluntary activity failed to synchronize to the new photoperiod or was significantly delayed. Combining
intersectional rabies virus tracing and projection-specific neuronal silencing in vivo, we delineated a Preoptic
Area-to-mrEn1Pet1 connection responsible for decoding the photoperiodic inputs, driving the neurochemical
shift and promoting behavioural synchronization. Our results reveal a previously unrecognized brain circuit along
with a novel form of periodic, branch-specific neurotransmitter deployment that together regulate organismal
adaptation to photoperiod changes.
Main
Sunlight potently influences life across all
phylogenetic kingdoms. Synchronized to the 24-hour
light/dark cycle are biological processes fundamental
to energy efficiency, cellular and organismal
homeostasis, and ultimately survival9

. Animals have
evolved exquisite mechanisms – collectively known
as circadian rhythms orchestrated by the
hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) – that
enable coordinated anticipation of alternating
day/night and dictate the temporal order of
physiology and behaviour including metabolism,
hormone secretion, physical activity, and
sleep/wakefulness9,10. Equally vital are adaptive
responses to changes in the duration of daily light
exposure (photoperiod)1,11 such as those that occur
with time of year especially at high latitudes or with
trans meridian travel, shift work, or screen time.
Compromised ability to phase shift to new
photoperiods has deleterious effects on human health
and can cause circadian and sleep-timing
abnormalities that are tightly linked to affective2,3
,
neurodegenerative12, cardiovascular13, as well as
metabolic disorders4

, severely impacting quality of
life. Changes in photoperiod duration and timing can
induce switching of neurotransmitter usage by
certain neurons in the SCN6

and their post-synaptic
targets in the Paraventricular Nucleus of the
Hypothalamus14

, thus implicating the core circadian

rhythm circuitry5

in phase adaptation to changes in
light exposure. Little is known, however, about the
precise causative mechanisms underlying phase
synchronization at the molecular and circuit level.
Here we report the involvement of a
subgroup of Median Raphe (mr) Nucleus (MRN)
serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) neurons and
associated brain circuits in adaptation to photoperiod
change. MRN neurons provide the sole and dense 5-
HTergic input to the SCN15 and potently modulate
circadian rhythms16–19

. Additionally, photoperiod
changes have been associated with transcriptional20
,
electrophysiological21, and structural modifications22
in some 5-HTergic neurons, thus suggesting a
potential yet unexplored role in modulating