Fig. 6. POA neurons projecting to the MRN convey

photoperiod signals and modulate adaptation to changes
in daylength. a, Schematic of the experimental approach and
timeline. b, Representative image of the injection site in the

MRN (AAVretro-cre; right) and in the POA (AAV-DIO-
Flpo; left) where POA→MRN neurons are labelled with

tdTomato (from dual Cre/Flpo-mediated recombination of
the intersectional reporter Ai65). Scale bar, 1mm (left);
500μm (right). c, Superresolution images showing VGLUT3
localization within 5-HT axons in the SCN of mice in which
POA→MRN have been silenced, as compared to control
mice. Arrowheads indicate double positive boutons. d,
Quantification of VGLUT3-5-HT colocalization in the SCN
(two-tailed t test, t = 7.611, df = 4, p = 0.0016, n = 3). e,
Schematic of the experimental approach and timeline. f,
Representative heatmaps depicting control (upper row) and
POA→MRN-silenced (lower row) mouse daily wakefulness,
NREM and REM sleep across days during habituation to
short photoperiod (schedule schematized in upper left panel).
Black arrow and dashed white line indicate switch to short
photoperiod g, Time spent awake between ZT5 and ZT12
(two-way ANOVA, interaction time x genotype, F (20, 60) =
2.027, p = 0.0186, followed by Sidak’s multiple comparison
test). h, Time spent asleep (NREM+REM) between ZT5 and
ZT12 (two-way ANOVA, interaction time x genotype, F (20,
60) = 1.978, p = 0.0317, followed by Sidak’s multiple
comparison test). Short photoperiod: POA→MRN silenced).
All data expressed as mean ± s.e.m. Curve graph: solid line,
mean; shaded area, s.e.m.

reconstructions to reveal those input boutons likely
contacting mrEn1-Pet1→SCN soma. Specifically, we
infused Fluorogold 4% in the SCN of En1-cre, Pet1-
Flpe, RC-FrePe mice, highlighting mrEn1-Pet1→SCN
neurons with GFP (intersectional) and Fluorogold,
and infused the potential afferent source nuclei
(POA, LH, or LHb, using separate cohorts) with
AAV2-CAG-tdTomato (Fig. 5d). We segmented
tdTomato-positive axons (coming from the input
region) differentially based on their distance to
mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neuron somata (GFP+ Fluorogold+
)
with a threshold of 0.5μm43 (Fig. 5e) and thus likely
making synaptic contacts, which we observed from
all three input regions (Fig. 5f), suggesting that the

mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neuron group receives inputs from
the POA, LH and LHb.
POA→MRN circuit underlies adaptation
to photoperiod shifts
Among the mapped inputs to mrEn1-Pet1→SCN
neurons, we speculated the existence of at least one
whose function is to decode and propagate
photoperiod information to associated brain circuits,
ultimately modulating adaptation. We reasoned that
altering the activity of such a pathway might
artificially mimic a change in daylength and
consequently alter the percentage of 5-HT+
boutons
in the SCN that are now also positive for VGLUT3+
, much like that observed on shift from equinox to
short/long photoperiod (Fig. 2b-d). We therefore

devised an intersectional strategy for stable, non-
invasive silencing of projection-defined neuronal

populations in vivo. We infused AAVretro-cre in the
MRN to deliver the cre transgene and thus Cre
expression to input neurons, such as from the POA,
LH, or Hb, and injected AAV-DIO-Flpo in either the

POA, LH, or Hb of RC-PFtox27, Ai65 trans-