heterozygous mice (Fig. 6a; Extended Data Fig. 9).
This compound intersectional configuration resulted
in expression of the light chain of tetanus toxin
(encoded by the RC-PFtox allele and expressed in a
dual Cre/Flp-dependent fashion) and the reporter
tdTomato (encoded by the Ai65 allele, also expressed
in a dual Cre/Flp-dependent fashion) selectively in
either POA-, LH-, or Hb neurons (dual Cre+
, Flpo+
)
projecting to the MRN, thus achieving stable and

long term silencing of neuronal activity through tox-
mediated inhibition of vesicular neurotransmission

(Fig. 6a-c; Extended Data Fig. 9a-f). Notably,
chronic silencing of POA→MRN neurons caused a
significant increase of VGLUT3 and 5-HT
colocalization within presynaptic boutons
innervating the SCN as compared to controls (Fig. 6
c, d), whereas inactivating LH→MRN and
Hb→MRN neuronal pathways showed no
discernible effect on the percentage of VGLUT3 and
5-HT colocalization in the SCN (Extended Data Fig.
9a-f). These data suggest that POA, but not LH or
Hb, neurons might convey to mrEn1-Pet1 neurons
photoperiod information relevant to VGLUT3
deployment.
To directly test the idea that POA neurons
might propagate photoperiod information to mrEn1-
Pet1 neurons, we examined whether silencing
POA→MRN neurons would alter adaptation to
changes in day length. We therefore monitored
sleep/wake behaviour in POA→MRN-silenced mice
during exposure to short photoperiod. We infused
AAVretro-cre in the MRN and AAV-DIO-Flpo in

the POA of RC-PFTox; RC-FrePe trans-
heterozygous mice and implanted them with

EEG/EMG probes connected to a wireless
headmount. Notably, while no sleep/wake difference
was observed in equinox conditions (Extended Data
Fig. 10a), POA→MRN-silenced mice showed
delayed adaptation to short photoperiod as compared
to control mice (Fig. 6 f). Silenced mice also showed
reduced time spent awake and increased time spent
asleep between ZT5 and ZT12 (Fig. 6g, h; Extended
Data Fig. 10b-c), suggestive of disrupted habituation.
Taken together, these data suggest that POA neurons
are uniquely positioned to deliver to the MRN
information related to light exposure, and that this
neural circuit plays a critical role in adaptation to
changes in photoperiod.

Discussion
The neural capacity to decode change in daylength
and accordingly adjust activity, behaviour, and

sleep/wake timing is vital to the survival and well-
being of most species1

. Misalignment can lead to

unproductive, energetically wasteful, and even life-
threatening animal behaviours such as mistimed

foraging or hunting that is unsuccessful and a
predation risk, and for humans clinically, can
increase risk for and worsen outcome of many
diseases, from affective2,3 to metabolic12

. Our study
reveals in mice a novel cellular and circuit
mechanism in the brain for detecting photoperiod
change and phase-shifting sleep-wake and activity
correspondingly. We propose that in humans this
network control point may be engaged in response to
changes in light exposure that include not only
seasonal daylength variations, but also trans
meridian travel, shift work, and screen time.

Central to this phase-detection and behavioural-
correction network is a previously unappreciated

form of axon 5-HT-VGLUT3 branch-specific
neurotransmitter deployment, here exhibited by a
subset of brainstem mrEn1-Pet1 serotonergic
neurons that collateralize to circadian and sleep
timing brain centres, the SCN, PVT, and SFi. Few
but compelling examples have shown that
specialized neuronal cells can segregate
neurotransmitters to different endings44,45
,
suggesting differential, target-specific
modulation46,47. Here we provide evidence that
segregation is malleable and reversible, being shaped
by environmental cues, and importantly that this
remodelling is physiologically relevant. When we
deleted the Vglut3 gene in SCN-projecting neurons,
disabling genetically this VGLUT3 reorganization in
mrPet1 neurons, adaptation to the new photoperiod
was dramatically impaired: Sleep/wake patterns
either failed to synchronize to the new photoperiod
or were aberrant, and synchronization of voluntary
exercise/activity to the new photoperiod was much
delayed, even under light conditions which in the
wild would be strongly aversive given predation risk.
Post-transcriptional mechanisms likely underlie the
differential deployment of VGLUT3, given that
Vglut3 transcript levels in mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neurons
as well as in other mrEn1-Pet1 neurons were
indistinguishable before and after photoperiod shift.
Rearranging the localization of segregated