neurotransmitters thus represents an essential, non-
canonical form of plasticity that expands

mechanisms employed by neurons to finely
modulate circuits and ultimately behaviour
depending upon state and condition.
Interestingly, a more severe desynchronization to
short photoperiod was unmasked when monitoring
sleep/wake synchronization as compared to wheel
running activity. This suggests that the latter might
boost synchronization, in keeping with previous
reports48
. Further, sleep/wake desynchronization was
milder in response to the long as compared to short
photoperiod shift, indicating that avoidance to light
might be a prevailing stimulus that induces mice to
seek shelter and sleep more. Mechanistically,
photoperiod-dependent neurotransmitter
reorganization and resulting glutamate increase
synaptically through augmented VGLUT3
localization could represent a reinforcing signal that
works synergistically with environmental light input
to reset clock neurons in the SCN. It is noteworthy
that both short and long photoperiod shifts induce an
increase in VGLUT3 within mrEn1-Pet1 boutons,
albeit to different extents. We speculate that the
postsynaptic target neurons may be different for
those mrEn1-Pet1 boutons that become VGLUT3+
in
response to a short vs. long photoperiod, thus
modulating the circuit differentially depending on
daylength. Interestingly, some SCN neurons (those
positive for Vasoactive Intestinal Polypeptide and
Neuromedin S) display adaptive neurotransmitter
switching in response to photoperiod change6
.
Investigating whether mrEn1-Pet1 neurons contact
SCN “switching” neurons, perhaps selectively via
boutons that undergo VGLUT3 reorganization, and
whether they play a causal role in this switching is an
important future direction.
At the circuit level, we identified the POA as an
essential node49,50 upstream of mrEn1-Pet1 neurons
responsible for decoding and propagating
photoperiod information. Adult-induced silencing of
POA→MRN neurons was sufficient to cause
neurotransmitter reorganization in 5-HT boutons
innervating the SCN, artificially mimicking a change
in daylength duration in otherwise equinox
conditions; however, sleep/wake was unaltered.
These findings suggest that deployment of VGLUT3
by mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neurons is not sufficient per se
to modify sleep/wake patterns; albeit it is necessary,

as shown by the Vglut3 cKO results. Only when
exposed to short photoperiod, POA→MRN-silenced
mice showed disrupted sleep/wake adaptation,
suggesting necessity of an intact POA-MRN circuit.
The POA appears to be uniquely positioned
anatomically to modulate photoperiod adaptation as
it receives innervation from both retinal ganglion
cells39 and SCN neurons10, thus representing an
integration site of both direct light input and central
clock output. Further circuit mapping will be
required to discern whether such integration happens
in individual or separate but locally interconnected
POA cells, and whether these cells are those that
innervate the MRN.
In summary, we identified a novel POA→mrEn1-
Pet1→SCN/PVT/SFi circuit essential for
behavioural adaptation to changes in atmospheric
light duration. A critical component of this circuit is
the MRN mrEn1-Pet1 neuron group, which shows a
novel form of periodic, branch-specific
neurotransmitter reorganization that tracks with
photoperiod changes and is necessary for
behavioural adaptation. By identifying relevant
molecules, cells, and circuit nodes, this work has the
potential to inform therapeutic interventions for
disorders characterized by circadian and sleep timing
disturbances.
References
1. Walton, J. C., Weil, Z. M. & Nelson, R. J.
Influence of photoperiod on hormones,
behavior, and immune function. Front.
Neuroendocrinol. 32, 303–319 (2011).
2. Zhang, R. & Volkow, N. D. Seasonality of
brain function: role in psychiatric disorders.
Transl. Psychiatry 13, 65 (2023).
3. Forni, D. et al. Genetic adaptation of the human
circadian clock to day-length latitudinal
variations and relevance for affective disorders.
(2014).
4. Depner, C. M., Stothard, E. R. & Wright, K. P.
Metabolic Consequences of Sleep and
Circadian Disorders. Curr. Diab. Rep. 14, 507
(2014).
5. Tackenberg, M. C., Hughey, J. J. & McMahon,
D. G. Optogenetic stimulation of VIPergic SCN
neurons induces photoperiodic‐like changes in
the mammalian circadian clock. Eur. J.
Neurosci. 54, 7063–7071 (2021).