with Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 568, Alexa Fluor 647 (
Invitrogen, Molecular probes) or Cy5 (Jackson Immunoresearch, #AB_2340462).

Combined immunofluorescence single molecule in situ hybridization (RNAscope) was performed using a two-
step protocol. RNAscope was performed according to manufacturer instructions (RNAscope, Advanced Cell

Diagnostics) using 20 μm sections mounted onto SuperFrost Plus Slides (ThermoFisher) hybridized with a Vglut3
probe. Afterwards, sections were immunostained for GFP, or for GFP and RFP, using standard protocols as
described above. For combined immunofluorescence RNAscope on mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neurons, sections were
screened beforehand for the presence of retrogradely labelled tdTomato+

, SypGFP+ neurons in the MRN as
assessed by direct fluorescence using a widefield microscope. Only sections that showed positive cells were
mounted onto slides and processed.
Wide-field, confocal, and superresolution imaging and 3D analysis
Wide-field microscopy was used to acquire tiled whole-section images (mrEn1-Pet1 neuron anatomical location,
AAV injection sites, Rabies Virus cell counting) using a Nikon Ti inverted microscope equipped with a Lumencor
SOLA LED light engine illumination, Hamamatsu ORCA-Flash4.0 V3 digital CMOS camera, and a Plan Apo
Lambda 10x/0.45 Air Dic N1 objective. Confocal microscopy was used to perform imaging of soma
neurochemical phenotype, dual immunofluorescence-in situ hybridization, as well as validation of rabies tracing
experiments using a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 equipped with LSM780, Quasar PMT and Gasp 32 channels spectral
detectors with a Plan Apo 63X/1.4 Oil DIC III objective. Voxel size was set to 0.13x0.13x0.31μm, resolution to
1024x1024. Superresolution imaging was used to assess the neurochemical phenotype of mrEn1-Pet1 boutons
using either a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 equipped with LSM980 scan head and Airyscan2 detector and Plan Apo
63x/1.4 Oil DIC III objective, or a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 equipped with LSM880 Scan Hear with Airyscan
detector and Plan Apo 63x/1.4 Oil DIC III objective using Superresolution imaging mode. Voxel size was set to
0.04x0.04x0.22 μm; resolution to 3148x3148; number of z planes to 23.
3D colocalization of SypGFP boutons with 5-HT and VGLUT3, with VGLUT3 and tdTomato, and between 5-
HT and VGLUT3, was performed semiautomatically on Airyscan images using Imaris (Bitplane, v9) as
previously described37. Briefly, each channel was segmented using the Spot function and artifacts were manually
removed. Distance based colocalization was performed using the MATLAB plug-in “Colocalize Spots” with a
threshold of 0.5 μm (distance between objects centroids).
Anatomical registration and quantification of Rabies virus GFP+

cells were performed by overlaying widefield
microscopy images with the corresponding Paxinos Atlas table using Photoshop 2021. Cells were then assigned
to specific brain regions and manually counted.
3D segmentation and quantification of input boutons onto mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neurons was performed
semiautomatically on confocal images using Imaris. GFP+ mrEn1-Pet1 neuron cell bodies and Fluorogold
immunostainings were segmented using the Surface function, while tdTomato+

boutons were segmented using
the Spot function. The MATLAB plug-in “Spot and Surface Distances” was used to segment and calculate the
number of tdTomato+

boutons that were closely associated with GFP+

, Fluorogold+

cell bodies with a distance -

o-soma threshold of 0.5 μm.
Stereotaxic injections
All surgeries were performed under sterile conditions. Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (4% induction,
1.5% maintenance) and placed in a stereotaxic apparatus (Kopf) equipped with a heating pad. After removing fur
and cleaning the scalp with ethanol and betadine, an incision was made using a sterile scalpel. The skull was
levelled anteroposteriorly between Bregma and Lambda and mediolaterally between two points equidistant 1.5
mm from Bregma, such that all four points were at 0.0 ± 0.1 mm z depth. After making a point-size craniotomy
with a dental drill, viruses were delivered using a thin glass pipette (50 μm at the tip) connected to a Nanoject III
(Drummond) at 60nL/min (100-200 nL). For SCN injections specifically, 3 steps (2 steps for Fluorogold
[Fluorochrome] injections) of 5 nL each (1 min apart) were performed at 46 nL/sec speed. When the injection