To
Fig. 3. Genetic blockade of VGLUT3 deployment delays behavioural adaptation to changes in photoperiod. a, Schematic of
the experimental approach and timeline. b, Representative image of the injection site. c, Efficient Cre-mediated knock-out of Vglut3
in SCN-projecting serotonin neurons. d, Quantification of Vglut3 knockout efficiency in SCN-projecting serotonin neurons. e,
Representative heatmaps of control and cKO mice daily running activity (expressed as number of wheel revolutions per second)
during habituation to short photoperiod. Black arrow and dashed black line indicate switch from equinox to short photoperiod. f,
Activity-onset curve showing the time of day at which mice initiate running activity across days relative to short photoperiod switch
(two-way ANOVA, interaction genotype x time F (32, 328) = 2.943, p<0.0001, followed by Sidak’s multiple comparison test). g,
Time spent running between ZT5 and ZT12 (time window affected by light/dark manipulation) across days relative to short
photoperiod switch (two-way ANOVA, interaction genotype x time F (26, 270) = 1.568, p=0.0425, followed by Sidak’s multiple
comparison test. h, Representative heatmaps of control and cKO mice daily running activity during habituation to long photoperiod.
Black arrow and dashed black line indicate switch from equinox to long photoperiod. i, Activity onset curve showing the time of day
at which mice initiate running activity across days relative to long photoperiod switch (two-way ANOVA, interaction genotype x time
F (12, 52) = 10.94, p<0.0001, followed by Sidak’s multiple comparison test. j, Time spent running between Z12 and across days
relative to long photoperiod switch (two-way ANOVA, genotype effect F (1, 130) = 15.85, p = 0.0001, followed by Sidak’s multiple
comparison test. Short photoperiod: n = 8 (control), 4 (cKO). Long photoperiod: n = 6 (control), 6 (cKO). All data expressed as mean
± s.e.m. Curve graph: solid line, mean; shaded area, s.e.m.

equinox conditions. To test this hypothesis, we
genetically disabled deployment of VGLUT3 in
mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neurons and studied adaptation to
different photoperiods as reflected in voluntary
wheel running activity, the daily onset of which
should rapidly synchronize to the new onset of
darkness (Fig. 3a, b). Specifically, we infused a

mixture of AAV2-CAG-GFP and either AAVretro-
Syn-cre (experimental group) or AAVretro-CAG-
tdTomato (control group) in the SCN of Vglut3flox/flox

mice52 to delete the floxed Vglut3 gene in mrEn1-
Pet1→SCN neurons. We found that all Cre-transduced
(immunopositive) mrPet1 neurons (TPH2+
) lacked
VGLUT3 immunoreactivity (Fig. 3c, d), suggesting
efficient deletion of the Vglut3 gene by virally
encoded Cre protein. By contrast, control animals
transduced by AAVretro-tdTomato (instead of
AAVretro-Syn-cre) showed, as expected, VGLUT3+
immunoreactivity in ~half of the double positive
TPH2+
, tdTomato+ mrPet1 neurons (Fig. 3c, d). To