their habituation. Control mice advanced their
activity onset (time of day at which they started
running) over the course of the experiment, taking
~15 days to phase synchronize to the new dark onset
(Fig. 3e, f). By contrast, cKO mice showed
significantly impaired phase synchronization, as
illustrated by a much-delayed onset of activity across
days relative to photoperiod switch (Fig. 3e, f), and
less time overall spent running between ZT5 and
ZT12 (daily time window affected by the light/dark
shift; Fig. 3g) as compared to control mice. Overall,
it took the cKO mice ~25 days to fully synchronize
their activity to the new dark onset. We next exposed
a novel cohort of cKO and control mice to the long
photoperiod. Control mice synchronized and
restricted their locomotor activity to the new dark
phase rapidly (light is a potent, aversive stimulus and
bright environments pose risk for predation; Fig. 3h,
i). By contrast, cKO mice showed bouts of activity
during the light phase (Fig. 3i) and significantly
greater time spent running between ZT12 and ZT19
(the daily time window affected by this photoperiod
shift; Fig. 3j) that gradually reached control levels,
suggestive of delayed adaptation. Further, we found
significant correlation between the number of
retrogradely Cre-transduced cells in the MRN, thus
the number of mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neurons in which the
Vglut3 gene has been deleted, and the duration
(number of days) required to habituate to both short
and long photoperiod (Extended data Fig. 6). These
data are consistent with the idea that timely and
robust behavioural adaptation to photoperiod change
requires Vglut3 expression, allowing for
neurotransmitter re-organization in mrEn1-Pet1→SCN
neurons.
We next tested whether such genetic
blockade of VGLUT3 deployment could also affect
sleep/wake patterns in mice exposed to photoperiod
change. Therefore, we infused a mixture of AAV2-
CAG-GFP and either AAVretro-Syn-cre or
AAVretro-CAG-tdTomato into the SCN of
Vglut3flox/flox mice, implanted them with
electroencephalography/electromyography
(EEG/EMG) probes connected to a wireless
headmount for chronic unrestrained sleep/wake
monitoring, and exposed them to either short or long
photoperiod (Fig. 4a). cKO mice showed levels of
wake, N-REM sleep, and REM sleep in baseline,
equinox conditions comparable to that exhibited by
control mice (Extended data Fig. 7a). Upon exposure

to short photoperiod, control mice advanced their
peak wake time, progressively synchronizing it to the
new dark onset (Fig. 4b), and increased the time
spent awake and simultaneously decreased time
spent asleep between ZT5 and ZT12 (Fig. 4 c,d).
Strikingly, cKO mice showed a completely blunted
response to this photoperiod shift. Their peak wake
time remained synchronized to the previous dark
onset, and they showed no increase in wakefulness
nor decrease in sleep between ZT5 and ZT12 (Fig. 4
c, d; Extended Data Fig. 7 c, d). We next exposed a
separate cohort of cKO and control mice to long
photoperiod and monitored their sleep/wake. As with
locomotor behaviour, control mice quickly confined
wake time to the lights-off period (ZT19-ZT0; Fig.
4e), decreased the overall amount of time spent in
wakefulness, and increased the amount of sleep
between ZT12 and ZT19 – the time window
previously dark under equinox conditions (Fig. 4f,
g). Thus, in this shift to long photoperiod, cKO mice
did show adaptive responses (avoidance being a
prevailing response to a light stimulus), however,
their synchronization was delayed significantly as
compared to control mice (Fig. 4e-g; Extended Data
Fig, 7e, f) and cKO mice never reached control levels
for overall wakefulness and sleep duration between
ZT12 and ZT19, indicating aberrant sleep/wake
timing.
Thus, the result of this projection-specific genetic
strategy to prevent neurotransmitter reorganization
in mrEn1-Pet1→SCN neurons was disruption of
locomotor and sleep/wake adaptation to changes in
daylength.
Monosynaptic inputs to mrEn1-Pet1
neurons
To begin delineating the input circuitry that engages
mrEn1-Pet1 neurons to respond to photoperiod

change, we performed intersectional, rabies-
mediated trans-synaptic retrograde tracing38. We

infused a 1:1 mixture of AAV8-Con-Fon-TVA-
mCherry and AAV5-Con-Fon-oG in the MRN of

double transgenic En1-cre; Pet1-Flpe mice (aka
En1cre/+; Pet1-FlpeTg/0), followed six weeks later by
EnvA-pseudotyped, G-deleted Rabies Virus
expressing GFP (RV-EnvA-DG-GFP). Brains were
harvested one-week post-rabies injection, followed
by immunofluorescence analyses and atlas
registration for region specific RV+
(GFP+
) cell
counting (Fig. 5a, b). Validation analyses showed