"Bayesian anchoring" and the fourfold pattern of risk attitudes

Francesco Fumarolaa

RIKEN Center for Brain Science, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan

Lukasz Kusmierza

Allen Institute, Seattle, WA 98109, United States

Ronald B. Dekker

Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, OX2 6BW Oxford, United Kingdom

(Dated: January 13, 2024)

Experiments on decision making under uncertainty are known to display a classical pattern of
risk aversion and risk seeking referred to as "fourfold pattern" (or "reflection effect") , but recent
experiments varying the speed and order of mental processing have brought to light a more nuanced
phenomenology. We model experiments though a Bayesian formalization of the anchor-and-adjust
heuristic observed in empirical studies on cognitive bias. Using only elementary assumptions on

constrained information processing, we are able to infer three separate effects found in recent ob-
servations: (1) the reported enhancement of the fourfold pattern for quicker decision processes; (2)

the observed decrease of fluctuations for slower decision-making trials; (3) the reported dependence

of the outcome on the order in which options are processed. The application of Bayesian mod-
eling offers a solution to recent empirical riddles by bridging two heretofore separate domains of

experimental inquiry on bounded rationality.

I. INTRODUCTION

One of the foundational results on decision making under uncertainty is the fourfold pattern of risk attitudes often
referred to as reflection effect [1, 2]. Given a choice between a risky and a risk-free choice with identical average
outcomes, subjects are risk-seeking when the possible gain is large (and unlikely) and when the loss is likely (but
relatively small); subjects are risk-averse when the possible gain is likely but relatively small, and when the loss is
unlikely and large (this is summarized in Fig. 1). The neural mechanisms underlying the effect have long been an object
of debate among neuroscientists [3, 4]. The effect is customarily described through phenomenological models, the most
relevant being Prospect Theory [5], which posits that subjects compute expected utilities by weighing probabilities
through a nonlinear weight function. The function is unknown a priori and must be specified as a parameter of the
theory, though only its convexity/concavity properties matter. Since the appearance of the theory, the literature has
seen the proposal of both variations [6] and alternatives [7].
One of the main recent developments in research on human decision making is the emergence of a body of empirical
evidence that Prospect Theory alone is not able to account for. Such evidence was obtained by psychologists by
modifying details of the classic experimental procedure – most notably the time allowed for decision-making and the
order in which the options are presented to subjects.
The former direction of inquiry concerns the influence of time constraints on individual preferences and choices (for
an overview, [8]). By randomly allocating subjects into time pressure conditions (i.e. varying randomly the completion
deadline for tasks), the literature has identified the effects of time constraints on risky, social, and strategic behavior in
such contexts as bargaining [9], beauty contests [10], decisions under ambiguity [11], imitation in strategic games [12],
and bidding in auctions [13].
What may be called "slow" risk tasks – risky decisions made with no hindrance to tackling the full computation
workload – have been carefully isolated in experiments such as those of [14], which involve substantial monetary
rewards for completing the tasks correctly and allow the full necessary time for decision making. These studies have
confirmed the risk behavior predicted by Prospect Theory, showing that such behavior arises as a result of underlying
prioritization, not short-term cognitive-load issues. It has long remained inconclusive, however, whether constraints on
information processing combine synergically with the fourfold pattern or affect the decision outcome in more complex
ways [15].

aEqual contributors