VII. ROBUSTNESS AND GENERALIZATIONS

Most of the assumptions that went into the building of the theory are arguably natural – such as the normality
assumption on the model of inner measurement error (which leads to the Gaussian likelihood in Eq. 2). However, to
model the prior distribution of the outcome we condensed experimental knowledge from the anchoring-and-adjustment
literature into a specific functional form (Eq. 5) that has been rarely encountered in psychology so far, albeit being
common in studies on numerical methods [32, 33]. To test the robustness of the theory, we must check whether it
would still be able to predict experimental observations if the prior distribution had a different form.
Therefore, while so far we have deduced behavior from assumptions on the cognitive prior, we are now interested
in the opposite logical path of inferring the underlying cognitive prior from what the experimental literature tells us
on behavior (Fig. 2). The detailed investigation we carry out in the Technical Supplement proves that indeed a more
general class of priors can account for the same fourfold pattern of risk attitudes, providing a more nuanced model
of resource-rational economic decision-making. However, all cognitive priors compatible with the fourfold pattern of
risk attitudes shares some essential features of the spike-and-slab prior. We report three rigorous results that clarify
the connection between prior beliefs and behavior:
1. Normality-rationality theorem. All options in the experiment described by Table I correspond to the same
expected gain/loss. In the language of bounded rationality, rational behavior would be to rank all options equally.
A striking result of our framework is that normality equals rationality. As we prove in Sec. S-V B, rationality is
equivalent to normality of the cognitive prior. A subject’s preference over options is rational only if the cognitive
prior is a Gaussian distribution (Fig. 5, panels 1e,1f).
2. Open mind theorem. We show in Sec. S-V G that a compact-support prior is incompatible with experimental
evidence. Since a Bayesian update cannot restore probability where it is zero at the outset, we would interpret a
compact support as signifying that some potential values of the outcome have been ruled out a priori. Similarly, a
non-compact support encodes an open-minded prior belief about possible outcome. Calculating the perceived utilities
curves for our theory shows that, if the prior has compact support as in panel D of Fig. 6, the comparative utility
function U behaves as in the dashed red curves of panels A and B of Fig. 6. The experimentally observed pattern of
risk attitudes implies, therefore, that the prior beliefs are "open-minded".
2. Leptokurticity of the cognitive prior. As an additional result, the emergence of the fourfold pattern reveals
that the cognitive prior is leptokurtic. Leptokurtic distributions can be hand-wavingly described as possessing thin
tall peaks, and thick tails clearly separated from them [34]. Thus, a spike-and-slab prior is a caricature of what a
leptokurtic distribution looks like in the unimodal case; such distributions are less restrictive than the spike-and-slab
prior of Eq. 5 but share its essential features (see e.g. Fig. 5, panel 2a). We can thus simply regard a leptokurtic prior
as a "softer" way to encode anchoring. Any other type of prior distribution would not be able to yield the fourfold
pattern of risk attitudes, as proven in Sec. S-V I of the Technical Supplement.

In conclusion, the prior we used to encode the anchoring effect is not a necessary choice, but any cognitive prior com-
patible with experiments shares its essential features, which points back to anchoring-and-adjustment as a mechanism

supporting or enhancing the fourfold pattern in fast decision making.