Figure 6. Sketch depicting the open mind theorem. If the prior has compact support as in panel d, the comparative utility
function U behaves as in the dashed red curves of panels a and b. An "open-minded" prior excluding no outcome a prior (panel
c) is needed to give the perceived utility a slope compatible with the fourfold pattern (blue curve in panels a and b).

VIII. DISCUSSION

We introduced Bayesian Anchoring, a formalization of the anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic according to the
Bayesian inference paradigm. In Bayesian Anchoring, the anchoring effect is implemented at the level of a prior belief
utilized in the subsequent Bayesian inference that is assumed to take place during adjustment steps.
In order to account for the experimentally observed features of the anchoring-and-adjustment process, the prior
should strongly bias the inference towards the anchor. Arguably, the simplest prior satisfying this condition takes
the form of a "spike and slab", which we adopted in our base analysis. We showed that this rather simple model
reproduces the fourfold pattern of risk attitudes mechanistically and without the somewhat arbitrary probability
weighting introduced in Prospect Theory. We also showed that less stringent constraints on the initial prior lead to
equivalent results. The latest generation of decision-making experiments has provided new evidence not explained by
Prospect Theory, such as obtained by modulating processing speed and processing order. We showed that Bayesian
Anchoring provides a mechanistic explanation for those results.
One of the central tenets of Prospect Theory is the idea that humans evaluate their options in terms of gains
and losses with respect to a reference point, which depends on the context and can be manipulated from outside, for
instance by rephrasing the description of a decision problem. Since losses and gains are not treated equally, the results
of the evaluation depend on the reference point, leading to framing effects. Our results suggest that the existence of
the reference point in Prospect Theory should be interpreted as an example of anchoring effect.
The anchoring effect and other cognitive biases have been traditionally explained in terms of bounded rationality [35,
36] which posits that humans, given their imperfect knowledge of the world and limited cognitive resources, attempt
to make good-enough ("satisficing") rather than optimal decisions. More recently this view has been enriched by
quantitative models of cognitive biases in the framework of resource-rationality [37], wherein each unit computation
has an associated cost and the optimal behavior has to balance costs of computation and sub-optimal decisions. In
this framework, anchoring-and-adjustment has been interpreted as a costly MCMC sampling process [29, 38]. MCMC
samplers start from an arbitrary initial guess and follow stochastic dynamics to generate samples from a desired
distribution. Since the values generated in the initial phase are usually correlated with the initial guess and may not