be representative of the desired distribution, practical implementations often incorporate a so-called burn-in period
during which values generated by the chain are discarded from the sampler. It has been shown [29, 38] that "premature
sampling", i.e. utilizing samples during the initial phase of the MCMC sampler, leads to biases that are similar to
those generated due to anchoring-and-adjustment. Moreover, within this framework such a strategy of impatient
sampling is often actually the optimal strategy. In this context, let us reflect upon the role of a spike-and-slab prior
in our theory as compared to its traditional applications in statistics, where it is usually introduced as an element
of sparsity-inducing variable-selection techniques. We hypothesize that its normative role as used in the model of
anchoring-adjustment is to provide a simple greedy technique of reducing the complexity of inference, as required by
the rational utilization of limited computational resources. This view should be explicated by studying multi-step
versions of our model in the context of resource-rationality, which we believe is an exciting avenue for future research.
Our model was inspired by the anticipated surprise introduced by Chan and Toyoizumi [7]. Their phenomenological
model of economic decision making is based on the assumption that a decision maker maximizes the anticipated
surprise defined as an expectation over a nonlinear function of the difference between the value of each outcome
and the expected value across all outcomes. The form of the nonlinear function was chosen to qualitatively match
experimental results. Our proposal can be interpreted as the normative underpinning of the anticipated surprise
model, although this mapping comes with a caveat: the original anticipated surprise model assumes a convex nonlinear
function for positive arguments, which the optimal estimator sˆ is not (see Sec. S-IV A of the technical supplement, or
Fig. 5, panel B4).
In deriving the results of section VII, the finding about the posterior (such as leptokurticity) were translated into
constraints on the prior by assuming a perfectly Bayesian framework. Such deductions would have been completely
different if we had assumed a mechanism to go from prior to posterior that includes costs for the process itself of
hypothesis update, as in Ref. [39]. Such theories of "Costly Bayesian inference" may have the potential to yield the
observed behavior with different priors. Identifying the most plausible way to explain observations with theories of
this kind remains a problem open to exploration.
Another future direction concerns the exploration of different anchoring mechanisms. The model assumed that the
initial guess (the anchor) coincides with the risk-free option if available. However, there are settings where such an
anchor may not not available, and the gathering of experimental data on such settings is a necessary next step to
calculate the prior distributions that lead to best reproducing empirical results.
Finally, the vanilla version of Bayesian Anchoring presented here does not account for the overall risk aversion for
losses observed in human decision making. This will also constitute a motivation for additional research on Bayesian
Anchoring.

IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Taro Toyoizumi for introducing us to the problem, Ho Ka Chan for discussions on prospect
theory and its alternatives, and Manuel Baltieri for inspiring conversations on the range of applicability of Bayesian
frameworks.

[1] D. Kahneman, Thinking, fast and slow (Macmillan, 2011).
[2] N. C. Barberis, Journal of economic perspectives 27, 173 (2013).
[3] C. Trepel, C. R. Fox, and R. A. Poldrack, Cognitive brain research 23, 34 (2005).
[4] C. R. Fox and R. A. Poldrack, in Neuroeconomics (Elsevier, 2009) pp. 145–173.
[5] D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, Econometrica (1979).
[6] P. Wakker and A. Tversky, Journal of risk and uncertainty 7, 147 (1993).
[7] H. K. Chan and T. Toyoizumi, arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12347 (2021).
[8] L. Spiliopoulos and A. Ortmann, Experimental economics 21, 383 (2018).
[9] M. Sutter, M. Kocher, and S. Strauß, Economics Letters 81, 341 (2003).
[10] M. G. Kocher and M. Sutter, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 61, 375 (2006).
[11] A. Baillon, Z. Huang, A. Selim, and P. Wakker, Ambiguity attitudes under time pressure, Tech. Rep. (Working paper,
Erasmus University, 2013).
[12] M. Buckert, J. Oechssler, and C. Schwieren, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 139, 252 (2017).
[13] A. El Haji, M. Krawczyk, M. Sylwestrzak, and E. Zawojska, Journal of behavioral and experimental economics 78, 68
(2019).
[14] S. J. Kachelmeier and M. Shehata, The American economic review , 1120 (1992).
[15] M. Kirchler, D. Andersson, C. Bonn, M. Johannesson, E. Ø. Sørensen, M. Stefan, G. Tinghög, and D. Västfjäll, Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty 54, 37 (2017).