TECHNICAL SUPPLEMENT
S-I. NOTATION

This supplement contains mathematical derivation of various aspects of the theory helpful for a fuller comprehension
of its structure. To ease the writing and reading of such derivations, in the supplement we will use a leaner notation
than in the main text.
• The function gσ(x) is, as in the main text, a standard Gaussian probability density with zero mean and standard
deviation σ. To avoid lengthy pedices, where the expressions for variances get long we will use the notation
G(x; σ) = gσ(x) and Gμσ(s) = gσ(s − μ).
• The prior distribution will be called simply ρ(s) rather than ρ0(s) as in the main text.
• Random utilities are measured as shifts from the mean value of their prior distribution (equal to the anchor s0
for the spike-and-slab case), so that the prior itself has zero mean. The variable s (now meaning s − s0) will
be referred to as the "deviation", and "zero-deviation" will mean "for s = 0. We will call x the displacement of
the outcome from that mean, which in the main text would have been called x − s0.
• The posterior distribution conditioned to a given value x of the measurement will be called φ(s|x) (with its
dependence on the measurement error σ being implicit) rather than ρ(s|(x, σ)).
• We use overlines to indicate averages over ρ:
h(s) = Z ∞
−∞
ds h(s)ρ(s) (S1)
• We use the notation ⟨. . .⟩x (or simply ⟨. . .⟩, leaving the value of the outcome implicit) to denote the average
over the posterior given outcome x.
• Finally, assuming the measurement error to be Gaussian with variance σ
2
, we write the likelihood ρ((x, σ)|s) as

gσ(x − s).
The one-step Bayesian update is thus described by:

φ(s|x) = ρ(s)gσ(x − s)
R
ds ρ(s)gσ(x − s)

(S2)

S-II. GENERAL PROPERTIES
A. Symmetry of the prior

With the extra assumption that ρ(s) is symmetric around 0, it follows that the optimal estimator given by the
posterior mean sˆ(x) = ⟨s⟩x is antisymmetric.
Indeed write

sˆ(x) =
R
ds sρ(s)gσ(x − s)
R
dsρ(s)gσ(x − s)

(S3)
and notice that if we replace x with -x, but then flip the sign of the integration variable and use the symmetry of
gσ , we end up having on the RHS the same object as before but with a minus in front.
The converse is also true. Indeed using the identity
∂xgσ(x − s) = σ
−2
(s − x)gσ(x − s) (S4)