Figure 1. Schematic depiction of the fourfold pattern of risk attitudes. Dashed lines outline risky choices with equal expected
values; along such a line, the green ellipse highlights the preferred region and the red ellipse the disfavored region, for gains and
losses separately. Although a cake and a bomb will be used to picturize positive and negative outcome, the common choice in
experiments is for loss and gain to be monetary, easing the comparison of expected values among options. In gain experiments,
subjects favor very unlikely but very large gain (risk seeking) or sure outcome; in loss experiments, subjects favor likely but
small losses (risk aversion).
Recently, "fast" risk-taking decisions have become the object of a dedicated set of experimental tests by Kirchler et
al. [15], who brought the random time approach to the analysis of risk behavior. The major findings reported are that
(1) time pressure increases risk aversion for gains and risk taking for losses compared to time delay; (2) fluctuations
in the outcome are suppressed by granting subjects a longer time to decide.
One framework that should be mentioned here as being applied to multiple problems in psychology is the broad
dichotomy between two alternative thinking processes: "System 1" (fast, intuitive, and emotional) and "System 2"
(slower, deliberative, more logical) [1]. The System 1 vs System 2 duality offers a convenient language to broadly
discuss a variety of different experiments. For instance, one may say that the role of time pressure [15], increased
cognitive load [16], or acute stress [17] during decision making is to increase the role of System 1, as System 2 would
be computationally and energetically more expensive.
One would assume that fast decisions rely on a different psychological attitude than slower decisions, and are
computed therefore on the basis of a different set of underlying risk perceptions. However, even in the absence of
a dual process faster decisions would be affected by computational limitations and by the reduced ability to cope
with cognitive load, leading to distinct outcomes. It is unclear at present how much, among the features of fast
decision making, follows simply from information-processing constraints. The fact that performance on the Cognitive
Reflection Test (CRT) and variable decision time correlate identically with the observed extent of cognitive bias is
intriguing but does not allow to draw definite conclusions [15, 18].
The finding that time pressure increases risk aversion for gains and risk taking for losses can be phrased as stating
that time constraints increase the fourfold pattern predicted by Prospect Theory, but the reasons for this trend remain
open to multiple interpretations. Kirchler et al. interpret the finding as confirming that System 1 gives rise to the
fourfold pattern, but the specific features of System 1 that would do so are currently unknown.
Asides from experiments on time pressure, another direction of recent experimental inquiry concerns the effect
of variations in the processing order of the options. Various features of visual processing have long been known to
affect choice behavior [19–22] but one crucial factor appears to be the sequence in which information is presented;
this has been shown to have an impact in real-life setting such as personality judgment [23, 24], clinical decision
making [25, 26], and judicial decision making [27]).
Most recently, [28] replicated the classical decision-making experiment we have described and additionally assessed
the processing order of the options. They did so in two different ways: through eye-tracking, and by presenting the
options sequentially. Both approaches led to the finding that the magnitude of loss/gain asymmetry effects is larger
when the risk-free option is processed first. A mechanistic explanation for this asymmetry is lacking, but a description