G. Open mind theorem (Incompatibility of compact priors)

Let us now apply the inequalities (S59) to the regime of large values of |x|.
Because the variance of likelihood and prior is never zero, sˆ
′
(0) is always positive. In the light of this and of the
tangent inequalities (S59), considered for large |r|, we reach the following conclusion. A prior that leads to a sublinear
asymptote for the posterior mean is not admissible because it contradicts experiments.
Recall now that (as seen in Sec S-II G) a compact-support prior leads to sublinear asymptotic behavior for the
posterior mean. We reach therefore the conclusion ( "open-mind theorem") that a compact prior must be ruled out.
The open mind theorem is depicted in Fig. 6. If the prior has compact support as in panel D, the comparative
utility function U behaves as in the dashed red curves of panels A and B.
H. The zero-deviation posterior is leptokurtic

Assuming that the fourth central moment of the posterior at x = 0 doesn’t vanish, it must be positive. This is
because if sˆ(0) and sˆ

′′(0) both vanish, we can expand as sˆ(r) ∼ sˆ
′
(0)r +
1
6
sˆ
′′′(0)r
3 and and sticking this into the

tangent inequalities (S59) yields sign(ˆs
′′′(0)r
3
) = sign(r).
Applying now Eq. (S10) with n = 3, we can write this result as

K − 3 =
s − ⟨s⟩
4
s − ⟨s⟩
2
2 − 3 > 0 (S69)
or more concisely, EK > 0 if EK is the excess kurtosis, i.e. the kurtosis measured from its Gaussian reference value.
In conclusion, the posterior distribution for zero outcome is leptokurtic i.e. has positive excess kurtosis.

I. Kurtosis of the prior

As explained in S-III, we are pursuing a path inverse to that of the main text, starting from empirically justified
requirements on the perceived utility and tracking back what constraints that entails on the prior distribution. In
Sec. S-V H, we derived some simple constraints on the moments of the posterior distribution. How do they transfer
into constraints upon the prior?
Above, when deducing that the excess kurtosis of the posterior had to be positive, we did not mention for what
value of σ we are requiring that positivity. Just like the value of the anchor, so the internally modeled measurement
error σ is not communicated to experimenters, and we may only reasonably assume that it fluctuates widely across
subjects and contexts.
Therefore, to take seriously the empirical observations, a constraint derived from them for the zero-deviation
posterior should be taken as a statement about all the zero-deviation posteriors corresponding to all values of σ.
Now call R⃗ = (R1, R2, . . .) the set of all the cumulants of the prior distribution of ρ(s). Knowing this infinite vector
is largely equivalent to knowing the distribution itself. If we call F4 the excess kurtosis of the posterior, now regarded
as a function of both σ and R⃗ , the resulting statement about R⃗ is then

F4(σ, R⃗ ) > 0 ∀σ > 0 (S70)
We thus have to (1) minimize F4 over σ, (2) require the minimum value to be positive and (3) infer properties of
R⃗ from that.
If we do that, we can easily say that the prior itself must be leptokurtic (R4 > 0). The reason is that in the limit of
broad likelihoods (σ → ∞) the posterior is equal to the prior. If the results of experiments have to be valid for large
σ as well (i.e. the constraint of the posterior being leptokurtic must survive) then the prior (which does not depend
on σ) is leptokurtic.

In conclusion, the prior may not be of the spike-and-slab type but experiments do reveal that, just like the spike-
and-slab distribution, it has a positive excess kurtosis (for a discussion see main text, Sec. VII).