where we are abusing notation by denoting both likelihood and posterior densities as ρ, with arguments and
conditionalities to distinguish the distributions, while we call ρ0 the distribution of prior beliefs. The next step
consists in determining an ansatz on the function ρ0(s) enforced by existing experimental knowledge.
To this aim, we will briefly review the relevant phenomenology.

III. REVIEW OF ANCHORING AND ADJUSTMENT

The anchor-and-adjust heuristic is a simple heuristic widely observed in human cognition [29]. It is usually associated
with the purported irrationality of human behavior as it leads to cognitive biases that do not seem to follow rules of
logic and probability as well as give rise to sub-optimal decision-making. While the concept has wide applicability, the
case most relevant to this work is the one where subjects, faced with uncertainty, start their estimation process from
a very rough guess termed anchor, possibly suggested by the experimenter, and then integrate additional information
to adjust the estimate. Since often these adjustments are not sufficient, this leads to an observable bias that can be
manipulated by the experimenter.
For example, in one well-known experiment [31] participants (high-school students) were divided into two groups
and were asked to multiply either

1 × 2 × 3 × 4 × 5 × 6 × 7 × 8 (3)

or

8 × 7 × 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 (4)
The trick was that the participants were given only 5 seconds to report the answer—way below the time required for
most people to perform such mental calculations. Thus, they had to resort to heuristics. One may expect that people
would perform a few steps of computation, starting from numbers on the left, and the extrapolate to estimate the
full product. Since the adjustments are often insufficient, we should expect students to underestimate these products.
Moreover, the first group should get lower values of the anchor and thus underestimate more. Indeed, the median
estimate for the first group was 512, compared to 2250 for the other group. This is obviously much lower than the
correct result (40320).
IV. ANCHORING AS BAYESIAN INFERENCE WITH A SPIKE-AND-SLAB PRIOR
In this section we formalize the Bayesian Anchoring model, describe its single-step realization, and discuss possible
multi-step extensions.

A. General considerations

The phenomenology we just summarized can be formalized into a choice for the cognitive prior figuring in Eq. (2).
Given an initial guess (anchor) s0, we posit that the belief over X is stored as a (prior) density

ρ0(s) = p0δ(s − s0) + (1 − p0)gγ0

(s − s0) (5)
We will refer to this as spike-and-slab prior [32, 33], the "slab" component being here not uniform but modulated
(for simplicity, as a Gaussian with variance γ
2
0
).

This prior can be interpreted as a mixture of two hypotheses about S. Under the first hypothesis (H0, with prior
probability P(H0) = p0) the initial guess is correct, i.e., ρ(s|H0) = δ(s − s0). As a consequence, observing any
information from the set of accessible knowledge cannot influence the initial guess, since we have

ρ(s|(x, σ), H0) = gσ(x − s)ρ(s|H0)

R
dsgσ(x − s)ρ(s|H0)

= δ(s − s0) = ρ(s|H0) (6)
In contrast to H0, the other hypothesis presumes non-zero variance of the initial guess ρ(s|H1) = gγ0
(s − s0).
Accordingly, H1 acknowledges the possibility that relevant knowledge can change the belief over S, since in general
we have