Figure 2. Structure of cognitively biased decision making based on a subjective update of utilities. The update may be thought
of as the result of reviewing past experience and simulating random outcomes accordingly. The perceived utilities resulting from
the process drive subjective choices. Sections II-VI of this article follow the flow of the model along the brown arrows in the
drawing, from assumptions about the internal variables all the way to inferred behavior. In Sec. VII, we show for completeness
the results of proceeding the opposite way, starting from the observed behavior and working backwards to infer prior believes
(gray dashed arrow).

C. Multiple adjustment steps

There are multiple ways in which one could extend our model to incorporate multiple adjustments steps. We need
to specify an update rule and a stopping rule. The update rule describes how the new prior for the next step is
formed from the previous prior given the observation. The most natural update rule seems to be to perform the exact
Bayesian inference and to use the posterior as the new prior. However, to perform Bayesian inference with multiple
steps of adjustments the agent should track values of pn, γn, sn, and to remember the initial value of the anchor
s0. Additionally, in general the Gaussian prior of H1 is not a conjugate prior if the likelihood takes a different form.
Thus, the inference may become more complex and may require approximations or sampling.

Another possibility is to perform a simple average over {xi}i=1..T (where T denotes the number of pseudo-
observations made in order to perform adjustments) and then use this sample mean in the single adjustment step,

utilizing anchoring slab-and-spike priors as described above.
In the following we explore another hypothesis that humans rely on a simplified recursive inference strategy. First
note that the process of multi-step anchoring-and-adjustment must at some point be terminated. The following
stochastic rule could utilize the probabilistic form of the posterior in order to make a decision whether to continue or
stop the process. A single sample is drawn, taken from the posterior distribution over hypotheses (i.e. H0 or H1). If
H0 is chosen the adjustment process is terminated and the value sˆ is reported. Otherwise, another adjustment step
is taken with a new prior that takes the form

ρ1(s) = p1δ(s − s1) + (1 − p1)gγ1

(s − s1). (15)
This formula introduces an important modification compared to the optimal Bayesian update. Namely, the position
of the spike under H0 is updated to reflect the new most likely position of s. Such reanchoring is not essential for
the consistency of Bayesian Anchoring theory but it simplifies the calculations and may help account for the fact that
the initial anchor is rarely reported, even if it biases the final report. We hypothesize that the reanchoring position
corresponds to the mean of the posterior slab (s1), but other reanchoring methods can be formulated. We performed
numerical simulations to check how expected bias and error change as functions of the number of sampling and
adjustment steps, depending on the reanchoring method (Fig. 4). Our simulation results indicate that reanchoring to
the posterior slab mean quickly removes the bias. In contrast, reanchoring to the overall posterior mean (sˆ) leads to
an extremely persistent bias.
Additionally, it is possible that instead of updating p0 to p1 according to the rules of Bayesian inference, pn is
modulated by the internally or externally generated signal indicating a sense of urgency. Intuitively, the more urgent
it is to finish the inference, the higher should be the value of pn. This in turn makes it more likely to stop the
adjustment process in the following step.