V. EMERGENCE OF THE FOURFOLD PATTERN OF RISK ATTITUDES

We now apply the framework we developed to the experimental setting routinely used to verify fourfold pattern
of risk attitudes [1, 2, 5], where risky choices are associated to a binary outcome as shown in Table I. The utility
acquired though a risky choice stochastically turns out to be zero or to have a positive/negative value. We will call p
the probability of the latter outcome.

Gain/loss value x Probability ⟨x⟩outcomes

Option A (risky) −→

Outcome 1 r/p p
r Outcome 2 0 1 − p
Option B (risk-free) r 1 r

Table I. Structure of a choice options in traditional experiments on economic decision [5]. Subjects are given two options to
choose from, a risky and a risk-free one. The last columns shows the mean gain/loss, i.e. the average of the gain/loss value
over objective outcomes, which is the same for both options.
As shown in Table I subjects who choose the risk-free outcome receive or lose a value x = r with probability 1;
subjects who choose the risky outcome receive or lose value x = r/p with probability p and x = 0 with probability
1 − p.
To yield the perceived utility associated to a choice option, the point estimate sˆ must be averaged over all outcomes
of that option. The perceived utility of a given option is therefore

U
(option) = ⟨sˆ(x − s0, s0)⟩outcomes (16)
Although the anchor is usually not reported, it is natural then to expect that the gain/loss value stated as the sure
outcome of the riskless choice would be the anchor s0 = r. Replacing this into Eq. 16 for the two options A and B
in Table I,
U
(A)
(p, r) = ⟨sˆ(x − s0, s0)⟩A = ⟨sˆ(x − ⟨x⟩,⟨x⟩)⟩A = p sˆ(r/p − r, r) + (1 − p)ˆs(−r, r) (17)
U
(B)
(r) = ⟨sˆ(x − s0, s0)⟩B = ⟨sˆ(x − ⟨x⟩,⟨x⟩)⟩B = ˆs(0, r) = r (18)

where we note that U
(B)
(r) = U
(A)
(1, r) because setting the gain/loss probability to unity removes all risk from

the risky option.
A decision is made by comparing the perceived utility of Eqs. 17 over all options available (Fig. 2), that is, the
experimentally observed decision depends on the sign of U = U
(A) − U
(B)
, which is just U

A measured with its p = 1

value for a a baseline.
Hence, the fourfold pattern of risk attitudes corresponds to the finding that the relative perceived utility U flips
sign as a function of the gain/loss probability p, becoming positive only for sufficiently large p if r is negative, and
becoming negative only for sufficiently large p if r is positive. Subjects will reject the risk-free option in favor of an
uncertain gain only if that gain is sufficiently large, and will reject it in favor of a purely potential loss (which may
ultimately not take place) only if that loss is sufficiently small (see Sec. S-III for details).
Simply plugging (5) into (2) and the result into (17) immediately yields the comparative perceived utility plotted
in Fig. 3, left-hand panel (see Sec. S-IV A for details). The utility indeed flips sign as expected from experiments,
yielding risky choices in the gain domain only for high gains, and risky choices in the loss domain only for small losses.
Thus, Bayesian Anchoring theory qualitatively reproduces the fourfold pattern of risk attitudes with an arguably
simpler set of assumptions compared to Prospect Theory.
The main assumption has been the choice of the risk-free reward as an anchor, which is motivated by the certainty
of the reward within the risk-free option. In other words, the reward associated to a risk-free option is assumed to be
more "salient". Within that assumption, the experimental results of [28] are also arguably explained as a corollary.
Indeed, suppose that the risky option is presented first. Only after the risk-free option is also given, its saliency is
recognized and the anchor set (or reset). This takes time and makes the process more liable to randomization. By
contrast, if the first option is the risk-free one, the anchor is set before the second option is given, and the decision