Figure 3. Perceived utility of a risky option with loss/gain probability p, measured relative to the riskless option with equivalent
expected outcome. Left: Predictions of the anchoring theory. The main features of experiments, such as the transition between
risk-aversion and risk-seeking and the associated reflection principle, are reproduced. Right: Predictions of the phenomenological
model of [7] shown for comparison. One difference between the two predictions is that the Bayesian model does not lead to
U → ±∞ with p → 0. In its basic version, the Bayesian model can only reproduce the symmetric version with k = 1 and
the bias towards risk aversion must be introduced ad hoc, similarly to the model of [7]. The parameter values used here are
p0 = 0.2 and γ0 = 10.
making is performed immediately upon hearing the second option. An alternative way to think about this is that two
different aspects contribute to the determination of the anchor, saliency and primacy. The interference between these
two effects is constructive if the risk-free option is presented first, destructive otherwise. This agrees with the result
of experiments where the processing order is monitored as in [28].
Experiments that vary the processing speed have a more elaborate output and will be discussed next.
VI. TIME-DEPENDENT FLUCTUATIONS: EXPERIMENTS AND THEORY

Kirchler et al. [15] conducted a comprehensive study of the fourfold pattern of risk attitudes over a large sample,
with real financial rewards and across multiple geographical areas.
One of their findings is that fluctuations in the response are enhanced by time pressure. In section 5 of [15],
the different components of such fluctuations are teased out by breaking apart the effect of time pressure on risk
preferences and the effect of time pressure on noisiness.
Experiment includes a risky option and a non-risky option. The amount suggested for the non-risky option is given
and requires no calculation, so in the Bayesian Anchoring framework it would correspond to the anchor s0. Thus, s0
is induced externally and as such will not cause much fluctuations.
However, whatever fluctuations there are will be dependent on the number of steps you go through before issuing a
verdict. The more time you have, the more refined an estimation you will do. In the Bayesian Anchoring framework,
the number of adjustments you take in your process will affect how much variance there is in the verdict. Indeed,
our simulations of multistep adjustment process (Fig. 4) confirm this intuition and show that the variance of the
estimate decreases with the number of adjustment steps. This result shows that Bayesian Anchoring theory can
qualitatively reproduce human risk behavior under time pressure and suggests that experiments similar to the ones
performed in [15] could be designed to further validate the theory and pinpoint its exact details including the form of
the reanchoring.