A Deep Learning Approach to Detecting Temporal
Characteristics of Cortical Regions
Ryosuke Negi1,*, Akito Yoshida2,*, Masaru Kuwabara2,*, Ryota Kanai2,*
,

1 Department of Engineering, Tsukuba unversity, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,Japan
2 Araya, Inc., Chiyoda, Tokyo, Japan
* negi15175@icloud.com, * yoshida akito@araya.org,
* m.kuwabara@araya.org, * kanair@araya.org
Abstract
One view of the neocortical architecture is that every region functions based on a
universal computational principle. Contrary to this, we postulated that each cortical
region has its own specific algorithm and functional properties. This idea led us to
hypothesize that unique temporal patterns should be associated with each region, with
the functional commonalities and variances among regions reflecting in the temporal
structure of their neural signals. To investigate these hypotheses, we employed deep
learning to predict electrodes locations in the macaque brain using single-channel ECoG
signals. To do this, we first divided the brain into seven regions based on anatomical
landmarks, and trained a deep learning model to predict the electrode location from the
ECoG signals. Remarkably, the model achieved an average accuracy of 33.6%,
significantly above the chance level of 14.3%. All seven regions exhibited above-chance
prediction accuracy. The model’s feature vectors identified two main clusters: one
including higher visual areas and temporal cortex, and another encompassing the
remaining other regions.These results bolster the argument for unique regional
dynamics within the cortex, highlighting the diverse functional specializations present
across cortical areas.
Introduction 1
While the mammalian neocortex has been thought to be composed of repetition of a 2
canonical microcircuit [1], the diversity of the cytoarchitecture across cortical regions 3
suggest functional specialization. For instance,the absolute receptor concentration 4
throughout the cortical depth is different across the cortex [2],neuron density and the 5
ratio of neurons to nonneuroncells (mainly glia) varied greatly across cortical areas and 6
regions [3], the frontal lobe contains large stellate cells in layer 4 [4], while the parietal 7
lobe’s layer 5 is characterized by large pyramidal cells [5]. Synaptic excitation and 8
inhibition display systematic macroscopic gradients across the entire cortex [6]. Since 9
electrophysiological activities result from the synchronous activity of neurons in the 10
brain [7–10], we hypothesize that cytoarchitectural diversity is also manifested in 11
electrophysiological properties of neuronal signals, such as electrocorticalgraphy (ECoG). 12
In previous research, it has been reported that different brain regions exhibit distinct 13
electrophysiological characteristics. For Example, the spiking regularity of neurons 14
increases as information flows from the input to the output regions of the brain [11]. 15
Furthermore, studies utilizing ECoG and single-neuron recordings have revealed that 16