the intrinsic timescales, derived from the autocorrelation of neural activity, become 17
progressively longer as the cortical hierarchy goes higher. This phenomenon has been 18
observed in both local field potentials (LFP) captured by ECoG and the spiking 19
patterns of individual neurons [12]. Notably, distinct variations in spike patterns have 20
been identified across different brain regions, including V1, V2, MT, vlPFC, PMd, and 21
SNr [13].Besides, it has been investigated that there are cortical functional 22
heteroginity [14–16]. Besides, there are gradients in cortical thickness across the 23
cortex [17–19]. Notably, the dominant peak frequency in a brain area significantly 24
decreases along the posterior-anterior axis, aligning with the global hierarchy from early 25
sensory to higher-order areas. This spatial gradient of peak frequency is inversely 26
correlated with cortical thickness, which serves as an indicator of the cortical 27
hierarchical level [20]. 28
In this study, we aimed to determine whether the functional heterogeneities of 29
cortical regions are reflected in the temporal patterns of the local electrophysiological 30
signals as measured by ECoG. To this end, we trained a deep learning model on ECoG 31
data to identify similarities and differences between brain regions and extracted latent 32
ECoG features. If cytoarchitectural diversity is reflected in each region’s ECoG, we 33
expect to observe distinct temporal patterns. We hypothesize that the model can learn 34
these patterns and predict the corresponding cortical region. Additionally, we predicted 35
that regions with similar cytoarchitecture would display similar latent ECoG features, 36
while regions with distinct cytoarchitecture would exhibit more divergent ECoG 37
characteristics. We divided the cortical regions into seven areas based on the atlas (see 38
Materials and Methods for details), and used the feature vectors obtained from the 39
trained deep learning models to analyze the similarities among those areas. 40
Materials and Methods 41
Experiment Condition of the datasets 42
In this study, we used ECoG signals measured by electrodes covering most of the lateral 43
cortex in four macaque monkeys during awake conditions from public database. [21, 22]. 44
ECoG singnals were recorded from most of the lateral cortex in four macaques during 45
awake (eyes-opened, eyes-closed), anesthetic and sleeping conditions. During the 46
recordings, monkeys were seated in a primate chair with both arms and head movement 47
restricted. The awake condition had eyes-opened and eyes-closed conditions. In 48
eyes-opened condition, the monkey’s eyes were open and the monkey sat calmly. In 49
eyes-closed condition, the monkey’s eyes were covered by an eye-mask to refrain from 50
evoking visual response. We used ECoG data from the eye-opened condition. The 51
sampling rate was 1kHz. 52
To prevent sample imbalances from different regions in the process of prediction by 53
machine learning, we standardized the number of electrodes across the seven regions for 54
each animal, adjusting to match the region with the fewest electrodes. During this 55
modification, electrodes near the boundaries of cortical regions were removed to 56
eliminate potential ambiguity regarding their regional affiliation. The following table1 57
shows the number of electrodes for each region, and table2 shows the length of the data 58
for each electrode for each individual. 59
Deep Learning Model 60
In this study, we used a transformer-based model called TERA [23] known for its high 61
accuracy in time-series analysis. While there are various analysis methods available for 62
ECoG [24–27], our research employs this transformer-based model due to its proven 63