Figure 1. The panels in this figure show the preprocessing of ECoG data and the model
trained to predict the region where the electrode belonged. (A) The cortex was divided
into seven regions based on the atlas. ECoGs were cut every 20 seconds from electrodes
belonging to each region and transformed into spectrograms after preprocessing. Four
macaque data were used to generalize the model. (B) Model architecture. The model is
trained to predict the region which input spectrogram belongs to. The model is divided
into two parts, Pre-training and Downstream, with Pre-training on the left side of the
architecture and Downstream on the right side. In pretraining, first, we masked the
contiguous segments to zero in spectrogram along both time and frequency axis. Second,
we trained the model by reconstruction the masked spectrogram. In Downstream, we
fine-tuned the model so that the model predict the region the input spectrogram belongs
to by supervised learning. (C) After training the model, we used the test data to extract
the activation patterns of the layer before the final output layer for each input, and used
those patterns as feature vectors. For each region, the feature vector was concatenated
to create a concatenate vector for that region.
Results 167
Prediction accuracy 168
The prediction accuracy as indexed by the F value per region for each individual is 169
shown in Figure2.A along with the average across four animals per region. As shown, 170
the transformer-based architecture successfully classified the region based on a single 171
channel ECoG signal over 20 seconds for almost all region for all the four animals. The 172
prediction accuracy of the HVC and LVC regions were relatively high, while the 173
accuracy for the PMC region was lower than in the other regions. These results support 174
our hypothesis that the temporal patterns in single channel ECoG signals contain some 175
information about the recorded region. 176
However, the specific attributes of the signals that contributed to the predictions are 177