Figure 4: Handling of the microfluidic device. a: The 36 wells were designed for handling with multi-pipetting
systems for cell plating and medium exchange. b: The layout was compatible with 256-channel amplifiers from
Multi Channel Systems. c: Application of compounds to the 3D neuronal circuits while recording functional effects.
3.4 Growth and morphology of 3D neuronal circuits
With our device, we demonstrated 3D culture of neurons forming functional neuronal networks within
and between the two compartments (Figure 5a). The top-down approach enabled control of cell types
and densities, in contrast to bottom-up organoids or neurospheres. The 3D cultures with a thickness of
150 μm enclosed by the perforated ceilings were healthy without active perfusion or agitation, and
culture medium in the wells could be exchanged without disturbing the cultured cells. This method
avoided complicated microfluidic tubing systems, which can have issues of bubbles and
contamination. Furthermore, perfusion systems can require larger volumes of culture medium.
Primary neurons mixed with the hydrogel were distributed in the 3D space and soma remained

suspended in the hydrogel without adhering to the device. After four to five days, neurons were live-
labeled with GFP and morphology could be monitored by confocal microscopy. Neuronal populations

in the two compartments were interconnected by neurites through the tunnels (Figure 5b) ensuring
that functional activity would be recorded by the integrated microelectrodes (Figure 6). By employing
confocal microscopy, the impact of the autofluorescence of the epoxy structures was minimized, and
subcellular features were visible even in the narrow tunnels.
We observed shrinkage of the hydrogel scaffold over days in culture, resulting in a visible gap forming
between the channel walls and the hydrogel (with embedded cells). This shrinkage appeared to be
caused by the growing neurons and was proportional to the neuronal cell density; without plating cells,
hydrogel did not shrink. With a density of 10 to 15 thousand cells per microliter the 3D culture could be
maintained for up to two weeks. Lower densities would inhibit network formation and reduce the
likelihood of neurites entering the tunnels.
In our work, the same cells were cultured in both compartments of each module, as our focus was on
demonstrating successful cultures with morphological and functional readout. However, the design of
this device encourages the combination of two different cultures. This capability could allow the
investigation of different neural types, analyze the transfer of protein deposits associated with
neurodegenerative disorders between two neuronal populations (Dujardin et al., 2014; Song et al.,
2014) or study innervation by including non-neuronal cells in one compartment. Moreover, by addition
of endothelial cells directly in the central well of each module, a blood-brain model could be
developed. Transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) measurements would be possible between
the reference electrodes in the central well and large electrodes in each outer well (visible at all inlets
in Figure 1a).