Figure 5: Neurons cultured in 3D extend neurites through tunnels. Neurons (13 DIV) expressing GFP
allowed high resolution live imaging of their morphology. Images captured at multiple focal planes within the
150 μm hydrogel thickness are rendered as maximum intensity projections with depth encoded as color. Neuronal
soma were suspended in the hydrogel and neurites extended through the tunnels, enabling electrophysiological
recording by the integrated microelectrodes. The magnification in b focuses on neurites extending into the
tunnels. The structure of the tunnels is visible due to autofluorescence of the epoxy photoresist. Gold
microelectrodes appear black.
3.5 Electrophysiology of 3D networks
Electrophysiology is essential for analysis of neuronal cultures and for observing the functional effect
of compounds, yet the challenge of electrophysiology in 3D cultures presents the need for new

technology. We have previously reported a solution using neurite-trapping microelectrodes (Molina-
Martínez et al., 2022). This work presents a variation in which the neurites extend between separate

culture compartments. In this device, we integrated 19 microelectrodes per culture module, with 12
modules per device having a total of 228 microelectrodes. The recording capabilities rely on the
unguided projection of neurites into the tunnels.

Figure 6 illustrates an example of spontaneous activity recorded after 13 DIV. In contrast to patch-
clamp (Irons et al., 2008) or conventional “open” microelectrodes (Soscia et al., 2020), the likelihood to

record in this system relies on the growth of neurites through the tunnels with integrated electrodes
and not on the distance of the soma to the sensor. The chance of an “open” microelectrode (that is,

not in a tunnel) of being so close to the soma to record an extracellular action potential is low (Molina-
Martínez et al., 2022). In Figure 6a, all 19 microelectrodes in a single module recorded action

potentials from 3D cultured neurons. This high capture efficiency was typical in our cultures; neurites
crossed most tunnels after one week in vitro despite the outgrowth being spontaneous and unguided.1
Recorded spikes demonstrated synchronized behavior, as indicated by bursts recorded
simultaneously on all electrodes (Figure 6b). The development of spontaneous activity was
comparable to 2D cultures (Biffi et al., 2013; Bradley and Strock, 2019). This synchronized firing
behavior demonstrated that neurons have formed a mature and synaptically connected network.
Recapitulating the amplification mechanism of the tunnels (Molina-Martínez et al., 2022): An
intracellular action potential is generated by transmembrane ionic currents, and these currents
generate extracellular potentials as they disperse through the conductive extracellular space.
2 When a
neurite is trapped in an insulating tunnel, the dispersion of current is restricted (i.e. the current
1 Supplementary Video 2 (Figure S7) is a time-lapse video of neurite outgrowth over two days. The
microfluidic device has similar dimensions but is made of PDMS on glass. Neurons were cultured in
2D to enable unlabeled imaging.
2 The dispersion of currents and the resulting extracellular potentials are known to depend on the local
electrical resistivity, which is higher in tissue than in cell culture medium. Neither enables extracellular
recording of axonal action potentials. However, the resistivity of our polymer structures surpasses
these by many orders of magnitude.