experiences a higher resistance) and thereby the resulting voltage amplitude is higher. This effect
amplifies the extracellular action potential of a neurite to levels that can be resolved against the
background noise of several microvolts. The recorded waveforms are as expected for extracellular
axonal action potentials (Figure 6c).
To demonstrate the capability to monitor the effect of chemical compounds on 3D cultures, we applied
picrotoxin (PTX) during recordings. PTX is an antagonist of gamma-aminobutyric acid receptors and a
hyperactive reference substance. Acute application of 3 μM PTX rapidly modified the electrical activity
inducing more frequent and regular synchronous activity (Figure 6d). This effect corresponds to the
expected response of a mature neuronal network response with inhibitory neurons after 13 DIV
(Bradley and Strock, 2019). Moreover, these data demonstrating the chemical modulation of 3D
neuronal cultures show that PTX diffused through the hydrogel within seconds, as expected for small
molecules.
It is important to note that in this device neurites may come from either of the two compartments, and
that multiple neurites from multiple neurons may enter single tunnels. Unidirectional outgrowth could
be achieved by structured tunnels (Holloway et al., 2019). Different waveforms can be recognized in
some cases, although we have not investigated this in detail. If activity is synchronized as in our
recordings, the multiple neurites may generate overlapping spikes. Moreover, the integration of two
microelectrodes in a single tunnel could determine the direction and speed of action potential
propagation.
We have demonstrated a reliable approach to record the activity from 3D neuronal circuits by
spontaneous trapping of neurites in tunnels having integrated microelectrodes. Contrary to other
techniques, recording does not depend on the location of the neuronal soma in the 3D space. Our
approach with substrate-integrated microelectrodes should prove useful for various 3D neural cultures.