We demonstrated the formation of mature neural networks within two weeks and modulation of their
activity by acute application of a neuroactive compound. The high percentage of active electrodes (up
to 19/19) in each module suggest that more modules with fewer electrodes could be integrated per
device, which would decrease the cost per data point. Our design without the need for active perfusion
presents a simple system for neural organ-on-a-chip models.
With the functionality of the system demonstrated, future work can increase the biological complexity
for specific applications. As the system includes two separate culture compartments, two different
neuron types could be cultured. Cocultures with other cell types could increase the complexity of the
system. One compartment could be used for a non-neuronal culture to study innervation. Similarly,
endothelial cells could be cultured above the ceiling in the central well as a model of the blood-brain
barrier.
While our devices proved to be reusable, future technical developments could include developing
scalable fabrication methods using other materials to reduce fabrication complexity. While we note
that our system provides capabilities that are not commercially available, adoption of such devices for
commercial purposes will depend on achieving fabrication with a quality and cost that are sustainable
for producers as well as customers.
5 Author contributions
PDJ, BMM and PC conceived and designed experiments. BMM, AN and PC performed and analyzed
biological experiments. PDJ developed fabrication methods, designed and produced devices. PDJ and
BMM wrote the manuscript. All authors edited the manuscript and approved its final version.
6 Conflicts of interest
PDJ, BMM and PC are named as inventors on patent applications EP3494877 and WO2019115320
('Device for the examination of neurons') filed by NMI Natural and Medical Sciences Institute at the
University of Tübingen.
7 Acknowledgments
We acknowledge financial support from the State Ministry of Baden-Wuerttemberg for Economic
Affairs, Labour and Tourism, and from the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under
Grant Agreement 031L0061 (MEAFLUIT).
Supplementary Material
Figure S1: Layer structure of the microfluidic module.
Figure S2: Lamination process for dry film resist on non-planar topography.
Figure S3: Gluing of wells to microfluidics.
Figure S4: Yield of tunnel fabrication.
Figure S5: False color scanning electron microscopy images of thick epoxy microfluidic structures.
Figure S6: Delamination of unoptimized epoxy microfluidics from glass.
Figure S7: Neurite outgrowth through tunnels.
Supplementary Video 1: Cross-section of the device concept.
Supplementary Video 2: Neurite outgrowth through tunnels.
References
Abgrall, P., Conedera, V., Camon, H., Gue, A.-M., and Nguyen, N.-T. (2007). SU-8 as a structural
material for labs-on-chips and microelectromechanical systems. Electrophoresis 28, 4539–4551. doi:
10.1002/elps.200700333.