2015), propagation of action potentials (Pan et al., 2011; Mateus et al., 2021), axonal regeneration
and injury (Taylor et al., 2005), cocultures with neurons and glial cells (Adriani et al., 2017; Park et al.,
2018) or innervation using cocultures of peripheral neurons with other cells (Uzel et al., 2016).
Towards models with 3D cultures in a scalable format, we have developed a new microphysiological
device that enables 3D culture, electrophysiology using integrated microelectrodes and high-resolution
optical methods. Microfluidics were fabricated directly on MEAs by photolithography of permanent
epoxy-based photopolymers. A notable advantage of this process is the flexibility to build precise
multilayer 3D architectures. The inert surface and transparency of the epoxy polymers make them a
suitable choice for microfluidic devices and compatible with microscopy techniques (Abgrall et al.,
2007; Ren et al., 2013).
With this device, we demonstrated a two-compartment 3D neuronal model, which required low
numbers of cells and low medium volumes. Neurons embedded in hydrogel spontaneously extended
neurites, including through the interconnecting tunnels with a cross-section of ca. 5×5 μm2 (Figure 1).
After growth of neurites into these tunnels, transmitted action potentials were extracellularly amplified
and readily recorded (Molina-Martinez, 2020; Molina-Martínez et al., 2022). We thereby achieved
reliable recording of the 3D cultures’ activity using microelectrodes in neurite-trapping tunnels.
Simultaneously, morphology of the cultures could be observed with high resolution. This method
enabled the non-invasive recording of non-adherent neurons with high efficiency and reproducibility,
enabling parallelization of up to 12 cultures per device.

Figure 1: Device concept. a: Complete device with 12 microfluidic modules (brown, 32×32 mm2) on a glass-
based 256-channel microelectrode array (49x49 mm2). Peripheral contact pads correspond to commercial

amplifiers. b: An illustration of the filling procedure, with seeding of cells in the two channels (i, ii) and then filling
of the central well (iii). Filling with different colors illustrates that different cell populations can be seeded in each
compartment. Compartments are connected by tunnels (red) which contain microelectrodes (not shown). The