channel ceilings contain a mesh (green) which prevents overflow into the wells during filling. Inlets are outlined in
yellow. For clarity, well outlines are shown only in iii. c: Scheme of the multiple layers for a single module. From
bottom to top: a MEA with gold microelectrodes, ITO paths and a silicon nitride insulator; tunnels for neurites (3
μm SU-8); compartments for hydrogel-based cell culture (150 μm SUEX); mesh ceiling for substance exchange
(20 μm ADEX); and wells for culture medium (3 mm COC). d–f: Cross-section illustrating the two parallel
compartments enclosed by a mesh ceiling (d) and connected by the tunnels (e). Neurons are suspended in the
hydrogel below the mesh. Media is above the mesh. Neurites project in all directions, including through the
tunnels where microelectrodes enable recording of action potentials. d–f are snapshots from Supplementary
Video 1.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Microfabrication
The fabrication process is illustrated in Figure 2. Devices were designed with CleWin (WieWeb, the
Netherlands). Custom MEAs were ordered from NMI TT GmbH (Reutlingen, Germany). MEAs on
glass substrates (170 μm or 1 mm thick) had transparent indium tin oxide (ITO) electrical paths
insulated by silicon nitride. After opening microelectrodes by etching the insulator through a
photoresist mask, gold was sputter deposited and structured by lift-off. Adhesion of gold directly on
ITO was sufficient without an extra adhesion layer.
Microfluidic structures were produced in three photolithographically structured layers of permanent
epoxy photoresist, described in detail below and shown in Figure S1. The first layer was spin-coated
while the second and third layers were dry film resist which was laminated to produce enclosed
channels. All baking steps were performed with ramping to and from room temperature, primarily to
reduce stress caused by the order-of-magnitude difference between the thermal expansion
coefficients of the glass and polymers. We found ramping reduced the need for manual handling as a
large hotplate could fit up to 36 MEAs. Heating the hotplate required ca. 10 min, while cooling took
more than an hour. For the oven, heating and cooling was controlled at 0.5 °C/min. All UV exposure
used an i-line filter. Lamination temperatures were measured by stopping a thermocouple between the
heated rollers. Proximity exposure was used to avoid physical damage to dry film resists, which could
adhere to the mask and be partially removed.
MEAs were pretreated by oxygen plasma (2 min, 200 W) then baked in an oven for 1 h at 150°C. For
the first layer (tunnels), the liquid photoresist SU-8 2002 (Kayaku AM) was spin-coated to produce 3-
μm-thick structures (10 s at 500 rpm then 30 s at 1000 rpm). A baking step (5 min at 95°C on a
hotplate, ramped) removed solvent. Structures were exposed (250 mJ/cm2, ca. 20 s, i-line, soft
contact, SÜSS MA6) through a photomask. A post-exposure bake (PEB), identical to the pre-exposure
bake, cross-linked the exposed structures. Structures were developed in the SU-8 developer (mr dev
600) for 40 s and then rinsed in isopropanol. An intermediate hardbake (150°C in an oven) further
cross-linked the SU-8; this was necessary to avoid overdevelopment of SU-8 in subsequent steps with
longer development and cyclohexanone.
For the second layer (compartments), the dry film resist SUEX 150 (150 μm thick) was laminated at 3
mm/s and 78°C. The carrier foil was removed, then SUEX was exposed through a photomask (2500
mJ/cm2, i-line, 20 μm proximity exposure). The PEB was 2 h at 45°C, then ramped (ca. 5 min) to 65°C
for an additional hour. After cooling, SUEX was developed for 10 min in mr dev 600, rinsed with
isopropanol and dried with nitrogen. To remove residues in the tunnels, dry substrates were dipped
again in mr dev 600, rinsed with isopropanol and dried with nitrogen.
For the third layer (ceiling), substrates were prepared for lamination by temporarily fixing a
150 μm-thick metal foil spacer around the SUEX structures to create a near-planar surface (Figure
S2). The dry film resist ADEX A20 (20 μm thick) was laminated at 3 mm/s and 75–78°C. The cover foil
was removed and ADEX was exposed (600 mJ/cm2, i-line, 20 μm proximity exposure). The PEB was 1
h at 65°C, ramped. ADEX was developed in a two-step process which was necessary to remove
unexposed ADEX and clean all residues from the enclosed channels. The first step was dipping in
cyclohexanone for 3 min, rinsing with isopropanol for 1 min, and drying with nitrogen gas. The second
step was dipping in cyclohexanone for 1 min, rinsing with isopropanol for 10 min, and drying with
nitrogen gas. In the first step, cyclohexanone dissolved unexposed ADEX and flowed into the air-filled
channels, transporting ADEX residue into the channels; some residue remained after drying. In the
second step, fresh cyclohexanone entered the channels and dissolved the residue. In both steps,