Plating in 3D
Devices were plasma treated (Plasma cleaner/sterilizer PDC-32G, Harrick Plasma, Ithaca, US) for
2 min to sterilize and generate hydrophilic surfaces. As cells should remain suspended in 3D, no
coating for cell adhesion was applied. The cell suspension was mixed with a Matrigel matrix (356230,
Grow Factor Reduced Matrigel® matrix, Corning Incorporated, MA, US) at a 1:4 ratio in cold
conditions and pipetted in the reservoir of each microfluidic channel. The liquid mixture readily fills the
channels and compartments, stopping at the mesh ceilings (Figure 1b). Immediately after, the device
was incubated upside-down at 37 oC for 10 min to promote the polymerization of the hydrogel and the
homogeneous distribution of the neurons. Then, wells were filled with plating medium (50 μL per well).
The cell density employed was 10 to 15 thousand cells per microliter and the volume of each channel
was 0.4 μl. Cultures were maintained for up to two weeks with medium changes every two to three
days. After 6 DIV, plating medium was replaced with maturation medium, consisting of BrainPhys
Neuronal (05790, STEMCELL Technologies Inc., Germany) with the same supplements as in the
plating medium.
2.3 Morphological analysis
One day after plating, neurons growing in 3D were transduced to express a fluorescence protein by
adeno-associated virus (AAV) with 104

to 105 virus copies per cell (pAAV-hSyn- hChR2(H134R)-
EYFP, 26973, Addgene, MA, US). The expression was monitored by confocal/spinning disk
microscopy. Images were taken after one week in vitro with a Zeiss Cell Observer® System with
spinning disk head and the software ZEN version 2.3. Afterward, images were processed and
reconstructed by Imaris 4.6 (Bitplane AG, Oxford Instruments, UK).
2.4 Electrophysiological recording
Spontaneous activity was recorded with a 50 kHz bandwidth using the USB-MEA256 amplifier and
MC_Rack version 4.6.2 (Multi Channel Systems MCS GmbH, Germany). Experiments were performed
at 36.5 °C, 80 % humidity and 5 % CO2, controlled using a customized incubation chamber (Okolab
Srl, Italy). Recordings started 10 min after closing the chamber for stabilization of the conditions. Acute
response to 3 μM picrotoxin (PTX) was monitored by adding PTX diluted in maturation medium.
Spike detection, burst, and network burst analysis were performed with NeuroExplorer (version 5.212).
First, recordings were filtered with a fourth-order bandpass filter (5–6000 Hz). Then, action potentials
were detected by a threshold crossing algorithm using five times the standard deviation of the
background noise (Quiroga et al., 2004). Burst detection was performed by NeuroExplorer’s Poisson
surprise algorithm with a minimum burst duration of 5 ms, a minimum of 5 spikes per burst, and a
surprise value of 4. For detection of network bursts, bursts detected on all electrodes (using their
median time) were projected as single events in one timeline, and the Poisson surprise algorithm was
used with a surprise value of 3 and a minimum duration of 5 ms. Moreover, network bursts were
confirmed if at least one third of electrodes (i.e. six) contributed.
2.5 Cleaning and reuse
After conducting the experiments, the neuronal culture was discarded and devices were cleaned by
rinsing with distilled water and Tergazyme (0.1% w/v) immersion for at least 3 h. After rinsing again
with water, drying at room temperature, and plasma cleaning, devices could be reused.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Device design
Devices were designed to support simultaneous morphological and functional assessment of 3D
neuronal networks. Materials were selected for sufficient thermal stability, solvent compatibility,
biocompatibility, and reusability. For the microfluidic structures, permanent epoxy photoresists enabled
high resolution patterning of multiple structural layers.
Functional structures
Microfluidic microelectrode arrays were designed based on a 49×49 mm2 format with 256 electrodes
for compatibility with commercial electrophysiology amplifiers (Figure 1a & Figure 4). Microfluidics
were addressed by a 6×6 array of wells with a 4.5 mm pitch based on the ANSI/SBS 384-well
microplate format for compatibility with automated liquid handling.