Each device includes 12 separate modules for independent experiments. A single module has a 3-well
footprint of 4.5×13.5 mm2. Two channels (width 400 μm and height 150 μm) with inlets in the outer two
wells meet in the central well (Figure 3f/g). Each channel defines a compartment for 3D cell culture.
Cells were seeded by pipetting a liquid hydrogel mixture into each inlet, filling each respective
compartment and stopping at the mesh (Figure 1b). The two compartments are interconnected by 61
perpendicular tunnels (width 7 μm, height 3 μm, length 200 μm, pitch 40 μm). The ceiling of each
compartment is perforated with 50 μm pores (Figure 3d) which constrains flow while facilitating
substance exchange (no active perfusion was necessary). This design allows separate seeding of
cells suspended in hydrogel in each compartment. The mesh ceiling acts as a capillary stop during
seeding, allowing a consistent volume of hydrogel with suspended cells to be seeded without
overflowing the compartment. Their culture is restricted so that cell bodies remain within each
compartment, while the outgrowth of neurites through tunnels to form inter-compartment synaptic
connections is possible.
Each module includes 19 microelectrodes located individually within 19 of the 61 tunnels. Each
microelectrode has a square gold surface of 25×25 μm2 (Figure 3b), although only a 7×25 μm2 region
is exposed within the tunnel (Figure 3c). These microelectrodes record action potentials travelling
through entrapped neurites (Figure 1d-f). The restriction of a tunnel amplifies the extracellular
potential generated around neurites to measurable levels (Molina-Martínez et al., 2022). We note that
action potentials were easily detected despite using gold electrodes, which are typically inferior due to
their high impedance (Gerwig et al., 2012), and additional noise added by the tunnels’ resistance
(Mierzejewski et al., 2020). Gold was chosen due to its electrochemical stability and resistance to
contamination. Electrode materials with lower impedance would be TiN or PEDOT:PSS (Mierzejewski
et al., 2020), but these would complicate the fabrication. The central well contains a reference
electrode (segmented in the well’s corners). The outer wells include electrodes for impedance
measurements, which have not been used in the current work.
Ancillary features
Large structural areas of thick epoxy resist were segmented to reduce stress and prevent
delamination at the polymer/glass interface. Specifically in the 150-μm-thick SUEX layer, features had
a maximum lateral size of 200 μm and were separated by 50 μm gaps, creating a pattern of walls and
pillars aligned to a 250 μm square grid (Figure 2). The gap width limited sagging of ADEX during
lamination and baking steps, while being easily resolved during the UV exposure (aspect ratio
height/width of 3). Without these stress-release features, large areas of thick resist were successfully
structured but delaminated from glass upon cooling from the final hard bake (Figure S6).
While solving the stress problem, this solution created an air-filled cavity within the device. Any defects
in the SUEX walls or ADEX ceiling allowed infiltration of the developer cyclohexanone into the cavity.
Trapped cyclohexanone swelled and deformed the epoxy structures. To mitigate this problem, walls in
the SUEX layer compartmentalized the cavity for each module of the device, so that infiltrated solvents
would only affect single modules. An improved design would keep the stress-release cavity open, so
that solvents could be easily rinsed. The open stress-release cavities could be filled at a final stage,
for example by a potting silicone.
3.2 Microfabrication
Glass substrates with gold electrodes, ITO electrical paths, and a silicon nitride insulator were
produced by NMI TT GmbH. Each substrate contained twelve modules (Figure 1a), each of which had
a row of 19 microelectrodes and a segmented reference electrode with a total area of 1.3 mm2 (Figure
3a).
Microfluidics were produced on the glass substrates by photolithographic structuring of epoxy
photoresists (Figure 1c). Successful fabrication required optimization of pretreatment, UV dose,
baking and developing. Resolution depended on appropriate UV doses. Over-exposure increased
structure sizes, which was critical if tunnels became blocked. Adhesion at the silicon nitride/SU-8
interface was excellent with pretreatment by oxygen plasma and baking, which can be understood by
cross-linking between a (3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane in SU-8 with silanol groups on the silicon
nitride surface. In contrast, adhesion between photoresist layers is explained by epoxide reactions;