each processed layer includes residual epoxide groups until final hard baking. In fact, oxygen plasma
treatment between successive epoxy layers led to adhesive failure.
The hard bake was important for adhesive stability of the final microfluidic structures in addition to its
importance to eliminate toxicity (Baëtens et al., 2020). Slow ramping was critical to prevent thermal
stress. The thermal shock of removing devices from a hot oven caused delamination accompanied by
audible cracking. In a rare case, we observed that thermal stress caused cohesive failure within the
glass substrate.
Lateral segmentation of the 150-μm-thick SUEX to reduce stress was critical for successful fabrication.
Glass and epoxy photoresists have a large difference in coefficients of thermal expansion (<10 and
50–100 ppm/°C, respectively), so that a conservative estimate of the extra expansion of the polymer at
200 °C is 0.7 %. A 32-mm-wide structure would need to accommodate 230 μm of strain. In contrast,
the segmented structures had at least one dimension limited to 200 μm, which would need to
accommodate a strain of 1.4 μm.
Inspection of thick structures revealed peculiarities not observed in thin films. The vertical walls of
SUEX created reflections (Figure 3c). When observed from above, the tunnels and microelectrodes
(observed through 150 μm of SUEX) and electrical paths (observed through air-filled channels) were
at different focal planes. These issues hindered interpretation of micrometer-scale features at the
tunnel openings. Observation from below (Figure 3e) allowed resolving these features in a single focal
plane. Filling the channels with isopropanol was a simple way to demonstrate that tunnels were
unblocked (as isopropanol could be observed entering and flowing through the tunnels).
In processing dry film resists, we used UV doses of two to three times the recommended values and
lower PEB temperatures; these changes prevented collapse of tented structures. For the SUEX layer,
the first step (45 °C) of the PEB enabled reflow of un-exposed SUEX into the tunnels while exposed
SUEX remained stable. The second PEB step at 65 °C cross-linked exposed SUEX. Thereafter,
unexposed SUEX could be developed and tunnels were unblocked. Skipping the first step caused
reflow of exposed SUEX into the tunnels and its subsequent cross-linking created permanent
blockages. Despite optimized processes, a handful of tunnels (~2 %) were observed to be blocked in
finished devices (Figure S4). These blockages may be due to shadow-like defects in SUEX as
revealed by scanning microscopy (Figure S5).
The ADEX layer (20 μm thick) formed tented structures across channels (400 μm) and stress-release
features (50 μm). The higher UV dose and lower PEB temperature reduced sagging of these tented
structures. Sagging occurred not only during PEB, but also the hard bake. We observed that ADEX
spanning stress-release features bulged upwards by 1 μm due to expansion of enclosed air during
baking, while regions above the open-ended channels sagged downwards by several micrometers
(Figure S5c).