Figure 3: Microfluidic features. a: The 19 microelectrodes and segmented reference electrode of a single
module. Electrodes are addressed by transparent insulated paths on a glass substrate. b: A single microelectrode
is 25×25 μm2. c: Tunnels are defined by the SU-8 layer (3 μm) and the SUEX layer (150 μm). The tunnels are 7
μm wide. The tunnel length of 200 μm is defined by SUEX. The vertical SUEX walls create visible reflections of
the tunnels (above and below the added dotted white lines). d: The channels are covered by a mesh (pore size
50 μm in a 20-μm-thick ADEX layer). Different focal planes resolve the mesh (left) and the tunnels (right).
e: Observing the device from below allows the tunnels, electrodes and electrical paths to be resolved at high
resolution. SU-8 structures extended 30 μm from both tunnel ends. f: The central well of a single module.
Segmented structures surround the channels to avoid stress-induced delamination. Not shown is the well
(indicated by a dotted line). g: The central region of each module comprises two opposing channels connected by
61 tunnels containing 19 microelectrodes. Three images at different focal planes are merged to show all features.
Except for e, all images were taken from above.
3.3 Device usability
Our device was designed for compatibility with multipipetting and automated liquid handling systems
(Figure 4a/c). This feature ensured faster and more precise medium changes and compound
application in the twelve modules. While this MEA has a 256-electrode layout compatible with
commercial amplifiers (Figure 4b/c), the modular design could be adapted for other amplifier formats
such as multiwell systems. In this 12-module design, each module requires three wells of the 36-well
layout. In previous work, we have reported on the experimental variability in 12- and 18-module
designs (Molina-Martínez et al., 2022). The number of modules, the number of electrodes per module,
as well as the total number of electrodes and the connector layout are adaptable. Our 36-well layout
has a pitch of 4.5 mm (matching 384-well microplates and enabling use of related hardware).
The transparent glass substrate below the 3D cultures enabled optical microscopy. Furthermore, the
photoresists, adhesives and polymer wells proved to be biocompatible. These materials were easily
sterilized and hydrophilized after plasma treatment, which supported the culture of neurons embedded
in the hydrogel. Lastly, cleaning of the device with a detergent solution removed cells and hydrogel
and enabled the reuse of devices up to 10-15 times until defects in microfluidic features were
observed.