did not exhibit any behavioural responses to peripheral photostimulation at 470 nm, even at
the highest intensity tested (3.0 mW, Figure 2K). Likewise, TRPV1::ChR2 mice did not
respond to peripheral photostimulation at 532 nm (Figure 2K). Together, these results
confirm that selective activation of nociceptive afferents by peripheral photostimulation in

TRPV1::ChR2 mice produced behavioural responses and excludes the potential for non-
specific photostimulation responses caused by hindpaw illumination or visual cues, unrelated

to ChR2 activation.

Grouping nocifensive response domains
In characterizing peripheral photostimulation responses, three main nocifensive behaviours
were commonly observed. These were tapping, lifting or grooming of the stimulated
hindpaw. Tapping and lifting appeared milder forms of nocifensive response, while
grooming, often maintained for an extended significant duration, was interpreted as a more
substantial response to photostimulation. To determine the most relevant approach to quantify
response data we first analysed a subset of animals (n=3) over 3 trials, assessing 10
individual tests for each animal and investigating individual response components (tapping,
lifting and grooming). Lifting always occurred in response to photostimulation (30/30 tests)
and was sometimes accompanied by tapping (6/30 tests) or grooming (4/30 tests, Figure 3).
The contribution of tapping and grooming behaviours to the overall response often increased
total response duration but never occurred in isolation from lifting, nor did they appear to
reflect a significantly different response phenotype (Figure 3). Given that the consistent
nature of paw lifting and variability of tapping and grooming, these beahviours were
consequently grouped for subsequent nocifensive behaviour comparisons.

Peripheral photostimulation repeatability and reliability
An important aspect of any viable assay assessing pathological pain or the efficacy of
analgesic compounds is reproducibility over an anticipated testing period. Repeatability in the
current peripheral photostimulation model was assessed in a group of TRPV1::ChR2 mice (n
=10) tested across three trials, separated by 3-days. Comparisons assessed the optical
threshold for paw withdrawal (lifting) during photostimulation, as well as withdrawal latency,
and response duration. Group data comparisons confirmed that the optical threshold for
withdrawal was stable across trials (p > 0.05), suggesting the utility of this measure to track
changes in nociception (Figure 4). In contrast, withdrawal latency was more variable with the