latency of trial 2 significantly shorter than trial 1 (0.45 ± 0.08 s vs. 0.85 ± 0.14 s, p < 0.05,
Figure 4). Finally, despite variability in the response duration between animals and trials,
mean values did not differ across trials (p > 0.05, Figure 4). Together, these results indicate
some measures remain consistent over multiple testing days whereas others (eg, response
latency) show greater variability. In a subset of experiments (n =8), animals underwent an
additional photostimulation stability test 14 days after the third trial. Group data comparisons
of the first 3 trials and the fourth trial showed that optical withdrawal threshold (0.87 ± 0.06
mW vs. 0.79 ± 0.22 mW), withdrawal latency (0.57 ± 0.06 s vs. 0.61 ± 0.14 s), and response
duration (0.81 ± 0.23 s vs. 1.15 ± 0.52 s) did not differ over this period, further supporting the
long-term stability of the peripheral photostimulation model (Figure 4).

A necessary aspect of the up/down approach to optical withdrawal thresholding was the need
to determine when withdrawal responses occurred as this determined the next
photostimulation intensity. While full withdrawal of the hindpaw is a prominent movement
that is easily detected, more subtle paw movements or adjustments related to
photostimulation are potentially missed in real-time. Video recording of all trials made it
possible assess each trial post hoc in slow motion to detect more subtle responses. This
analysis confirmed that most withdrawal responses detected in real-time (79.84%, 293/367
assessed) accurately identified the onset of photostimulation associated behaviour. Of the
remaining responses, slow-motion analysis detected photostimulation related movement of
the hindpaw in 16.9% of trials that were originally classified as no response. This highlights
even finer sensitivity may be possible if high speed videography and analysis were employed
in the future. In addition, slow motion reanalysis identified a small number of
photostimulation trials (3%), originally classified as containing a withdrawal response, that
were reappraised as a spontaneous movement rather than a nocifensive response. Although
this is a low error rate for small rodent behavioural analyses, and unlikely to influence the
outcome of the up/down analysis, it also highlights scope for improvements that might be
possible implementing computer vision and machine learning to remove human error.

Analgesic sensitivity of peripheral photostimulation
To test the potential utility of peripheral photostimulation as an analgesic screening model, a
cohort of animals was assessed before and after administration of a gold standard analgesic,
morphine, as well as inclusion of a vehicle control saline injection (Figure 5, n = 7).