DISCUSSION
This study presents data supporting the use of optogenetics and peripheral photostimulation
as a quantitative model to investigate nociception and assess the efficacy of potential
analgesic compounds. We confirm that baseline photostimulation responses are stable across
a time period that allows repeated trials for several days, with the optical withdrawal
threshold the most reliable measure. Our data also confirms that the peripheral
photostimulation model is sensitive to morphine, a prototypical analgesic, supporting the
proposal that this model can provide an index of analgesic efficacy, also establishing
reference data to benchmark other compounds against. Together, these findings suggest that
addition of peripheral photostimulation to the preclinical nociceptive screening toolkit, using
light rather than tissue damage and evoking a purely nociceptive signal, can enhance our
ability to identify and develop new pain therapies.

It is important to recognise that several other studies have also utilized optogenetics to evoke
peripheral photostimulation responses. Novel applications of this technology have continually
grown since the first description of in vivo optogenetic nociceptive pathway activation,
demonstrating photostimulation elicited acute behavioural responses, central sensitisation,
and conditioned place aversion [13]. For example, precise control of peripheral afferents with
photostimulation has allowed studies to characterise neural pathways and circuits [2; 3],
demonstrate novel cytokine-mediated macrophage-nociceptor interactions [21], delineate an
activity dependent protective molecular pathway for transient nociceptor sensitization [37]
and resolve the role of specific afferents on sensory experience and pathology [34; 39].
Interestingly, while some studies employed the same TRPV1::ChR2 used here, many used
different transgenic animals selectively targeting a range of primary afferents types including
Ab fibres [39], tachykinin-1 (TAC1)-expressing [3], neuropeptide Y receptor-2 (NPYR2)-
expressing [2], mas1-related G-protein-coupled receptor A3 (MrgprA3)-expressing [34], mast
cell function-associated antigen (MAFA)-expressing [2], voltage-gated sodium channel
Nav1.8 [13], and advillin-positive [29]. Applying the optical thresholding and compound
screening approach described here across this range of animals represents a valuable
opportunity for future drug discovery, mechanism, and efficacy studies. Likewise, the field of
visceral nociception and pain research has incorporated optogenetic research approaches to
selectively activate specific organ afferents using implantable LED systems [36]. Optical
thresholding principles may also be applied here to rapidly advance drug discovery for
visceral pain although a reliable and consistent behavioural readout would be required.