Consistent with the rapidly evolving use of optogenetics in pain research, our experiments
also stand to benefit from a variety of developments. For example, a number of studies have
used high-speed videography to improve the accuracy of response latencies recorded in
comparable photostimulation paradigms [1; 2; 6; 8]. Implementation high-speed videography
with optical threshold testing would likely provide additional insights on analgesic responses,
although the simpler, more cost and time effective approach taken here was adequate to
resolve a substantial morphine effect. Specific to the context of analgesic testing and
discovery, the most effective compounds should produce large changes in sensitivity that
would correspond to potent analgesia. Interestingly, recent description of an automated
approach to photostimulation delivery and real-time analysis of behavioural responses offers
an alternative approach to high-speed videography and would be amenable to implementation
of optical thresholding [14]. This innovation also offers the opportunity for testing at greater
scale, moving the optical thresholding approach toward a higher throughput screen.

One limitation of all nociceptive assessments based on reflex behaviour is their potential lack
of relevance to the higher order experience and perception of pain. This issue has been
elegantly addressed, combining optogenetics and a sensory detection task that allows animals
to self-report detection of peripheral photostimulation in a lick-response paradigm [5]. Whilst
more elaborate in the need for pre-training, this nociception self-report assay could also be
combined with an optical thresholding procedure to track changes in nociceptive perception
and analgesic screening. Likewise, Zhang et al. [42] have described an automated paw force,
body and face grooming detection system, based on frustrated internal reflectance, for a
simplified assessment of complex pain behaviours. Combined with the up/down optical
thresholding paradigm described here, these innovations could constitute a multimodal
readout of peripheral photostimulation to objectively screen analgesic efficacy and further
enhance preclinical drug discovery.