Figure 1. In vivo peripheral photostimulation experimental setup and procedure. (A) a
TRPV1::ChR2 animal is placed in a clear plexiglass cylinder positioned on an elevated
plexiglass platform. Two mirrors are positioned behind the cylinder so that the animal can be
visualised from all angles with front on video camera recording. An LED driver is connected
to 470 nm fibre-coupled LED, attached to a custom-mounted fibre optic patch cable under the
elevated platform to deliver photostimulation through a 1 mm exposed fibre optic probe. The
fibre optic probe tip is positioned a set distance from the underside of the elevated plexiglass
floor to deliver consistent photostimulation intensities. The LED driver is triggered after
positioning under the hindpaw of the mouse via a Master-8 pulse stimulator, which provides
a timed 1 second TTL pulse. (B) images show hindpaw photostimulation with an examples of
no response and response trials. (C) diagram summarizes 5-trial up/down paradigm for
photostimulation. Following the first photostimulus at a set intensity of 1mW, subsequent
photostimulus intensities are determined based on the result of the previous trial, increasing
intensity if no withdrawal response to the prior intensity was observed, or decreasing if a
withdrawal response was observed. A total of 5 photostimulation trials are conducted and the
optical threshold assigned as the last photostimulation intensity +/- an adjustment factor of
half the intensity to the next highest photostimulation intensity if there was no withdrawal
response recorded in the last photostimulation trial, or half the intensity to the next lowest
photostimulation intensity if the last photostimulation trial caused a withdrawal response.
Figure 2. Expression of ChR2 in DRG and spinal dorsal horn of TRPV1::ChR2 mice
and validation of selective photostimulation responses. A-D, images show distribution of
ChR2/GFP (green, A), CGRP (red, B) and NF200 (blue, C) expression in DRG section, taken
from a TRPV1::ChR2 mouse. Merged image (D) shows significant overlap of ChR2/GFP and
CGRP-labelled cell profiles confirming the expected expression in small diameter peptidergic
DRG cells. The lack of overlap between ChR2/GFP and NF200 confirms expression is
largely excluded from large diameter myelinated DRG cells. Plots compare marker overlap
(E) supporting significant overlap between ChR2/GFP and CGRP with minimal overlap
between NF200 and either ChR2/GFP or CGRP. This relationship also correlates with the
cell diameter for each population (F), with significant overlap between ChR2/GFP and
CGRP, both having an average of approximately 20 μm, and minimal overlap between
NF200 and either ChR2/GFP or CGRP, with NF200 averaging approximately 30 μm. G-I,
images show a spinal dorsal horn (DH) section with ChR2/GFP (green, G) and CGRP (red,
H) labelling. The merged immunolabelling (I) shows significant overlap of ChR2/GFP and
CGRP profiles, consistent with ChR2/GFP expression limited to nociceptive afferents
terminals. J, to confirm nocifensive responses were specific to ChR2 activation in the
TRPV1::ChR2 transgenic animal line two control models were assessed. The first assessed
the uncrossed parent line for the TRPV1::ChR2 animal, the Ai32 animal (n = 4), lacking
TRPV1:cre to enable ChR2 expression. The second control used crossed TRPV1::ChR2
animals but instead of 470 nm blue light, photostimulation was applied at 532 nm light
(green), outside the peak ChR2 excitation wavelength (n = 4). K, importantly, no response to
peripheral photostimulation was observed in either control experiment at intensities up to 3
mW, exceeding the photostimulation intensity required to evoke responses in peripheral