photostimulation of TRPV1::ChR2 mice (n=8). K, group data plots highlight the lack of
response in either control model, confirming peripheral photostimulation are specific to
TRPV1::ChR2 animals. All scale bars: 100 μm. Abbreviation NR = No response.
Figure 3. Classifying peripheral photostimulation evoked nocifensive responses. Initial
assessment of photostimulation responses highlighted a range of different behaviours
reflective of a nocifensive response including: lifting, tapping and grooming of the target
hindpaw. A, images are consecutive stills from an example recording, showing the

photostimulation period (blue line) frames including different behavioural responses (lifting-
orange, grooming – purple). B, in order to determine the relative prevalence of each

behaviour, video recordings were assessed from a subset of animals (n=3) over 3 trials, to
determine the prevalence of each behaviour at threshold photostimulation intensity. Images
shows analysis of 3 trails (different animals), with varying degrees of lifting, grooming and
tapping. C, group data plots show paw lifting always occurred (30/30 trials) and was
sometimes accompanied by tapping (6/30 trails) or grooming (7/30 trials). These observations
supported grouping of the three behaviours for subsequent analyses collectively reflective the
overall nocifensive response.
Figure 4. Peripheral photostimulation response stability testing. A, timeline summarizes
peripheral phototstimulation testing schedule. All testing commenced with an acclimatisation
period and three photostimulation trials were then performed with a 2-day break between
trials, in some animals (n=8) a 4th trial was repeated, 14 days after the initial testing. B,
panels show heatbar summaries of peripheral photostimulation responses across multiple
trials. Nocifensive response intensity is denoted by colour and binned in 100 ms epochs. Each
bar summarizes an individual mouses threshold photostimulation trail (M1-M10), with the
group average presented below each trial number (1-4), also presented together for
comparison (below). C, group data plots compare optical threshold, response latency, and
response duration. Optical threshold was similar across all trials, whereas response latency
differed between Trial 1 and Trial 2 (p < 0.05.). No other differences were seen across trials.
Abbreviation NR = No response.
Figure 5. Effect of morphine on peripheral photostimulation response characteristics.
A, timeline summarizes peripheral photostimulation testing schedule. All animals (n=7)
underwent an initial acclimatization period before undergoing photostimulation trials at
baseline, following vehicle injection (saline), and following morphine injection (30 mg/kg),
with a 3-day break between trials. B, Panels show heatbar summaries of peripheral
photostimulation responses in each mouse (M1-M7) across trials. Nocifensive response
intensity is denoted by colour and binned in 100 ms epochs. Each heatbar shows an
individual animals response at threshold photostimulation (determined in the baseline trial),
with average for all animal below. C, group data plots compare optical threshold, response
latency, and response duration. Following morphine administration (s.c.) optical threshold
increased compared to both baseline and vehicle (p < 0.001). By extension, as the initial
determined optical threshold did not provoke withdrawal responses and so response latency