INTRODUCTION
Despite decades of intensive preclinical research, progress to develop new pain treatments
has remained slow and largely unsuccessful. While there are many potential explanations for
this failure, questions have been raised about the validity and predictive capacity of current
preclinical nociceptive assessment and analgesic screening tools, suggesting a need for novel
approaches [10; 22; 32]. With no test able to directly measure pain in animals, assessments
depend on evaluation of nociceptive responses, usually involving avoidance or nocifensive
behaviours that are used as surrogate indicators of pain [4; 15; 28; 33]. The existing array of
preclinical nociceptive assessment and analgesic screening tools include application of
electrical, thermal, chemical, or mechanical stimuli to elicit a nociceptive response,
commonly hindpaw withdrawal, licking, shaking, or grooming; and are typically used in
conjunction with experimentally induced pain models that produce altered or pathological
nociceptive signaling [4; 15; 28; 33].

In addition to characterising pain responses, tests can also specifically determine sensory
thresholds, determining the minimum stimulus intensity required to provoke a hindpaw
withdrawal response that can be reassessed during or following the onset of pathology or
administration of experimental compounds [4]. Together, these approaches provide
quantifiable measures related to nociception with clear face validity to the experience of pain.
A key limitation of these thresholding-based approaches, however, is that stimuli generally
activate a range of sensory receptor types (e.g. mechanoreceptive, thermoreceptive and
chemoreceptive) [4; 15; 23]. Furthermore, high intensity stimuli are required to study
nociception, carrying the risk of tissue damage. Fortunately, a range of technical and
experimental advances have provided opportunities to develop new measures of pain and
nociception in animals, expanding the preclinical assessment tools for studying pathological
pain and assessing analgesic efficacy. For example, combinations of high-speed video
imaging, statistical analysis, and machine learning are increasingly being employed to
identify novel measures of spontaneous pain behaviour and automate this analysis [18].

Recent experimental advances have also provided new ways to activate neural pathways and
study pain processing, including the fields of chemogenetics and optogenetics [16; 31; 35]. In
the case of optogenetics, light sensitive proteins known as opsins can be specifically
expressed in a target cell population, rendering these cells light-sensitive [27; 38]. Several
studies have established that optogenetics can be used to activate peripheral nociceptors and