between sessions. Following acclimatization, animals entered an experimental protocol. On
the testing day, each animal was placed in the recording arena for 10 minutes prior to
photostimulation, with video recording commenced to capture baseline activity. Following a
simplified up-down approach modelled to that described by Bonin et al. [7] for von Frey
filament testing, 5 photostimulation trials were applied, varying photostimulation intensity in
an ‘up/down’ manner. The first stimulus trial was at the approximate photostimulation
intensities (1mW) required to provoke a withdrawal response, determined in a pilot test
cohort. The subsequent photostimulation intensity was determined by the up/down rules
based on the response to the previous trial. Photostimulation intensity was increased if no
response was recorded for the prior trial and decreased if the prior trial recorded a withdrawal
response. Each trial commenced once the animal stopped moving and appeared to be settled,
with the LED activated to deliver a 1-second light pulse to the right hindpaw and observing
the response (Figure 1B). A three-minute time out between photostimulation trials allowed
the animal behaviour to return to baseline. The response to the photostimulation (yes/no) was
noted and the LED intensity was adjusted for the next photostimulation. All testing was
scored in real time (response vs. no response) to determine the next photostimulation
intensity value (Figure 1C). The optical threshold was assigned as the intensity of the last
photostimulation intensity +/- an adjustment factor that was half the increment to the next
intensity (up if there was no response or down if the last trial caused a response).

Testing trials were spaced 3-days apart, and three initial baseline optical threshold testing
sessions were performed to test the stability of baseline optical thresholds and response
behaviours (n=9). An additional fourth baseline test was undertaken in a subset of animals
(n=6) at a later timepoint (14 days following conclusion of the initial baseline testing), which
would exceed the time required to undertake analgesic screening. This was used to assess the
long-term stability of optical thresholds and nociceptive responses for several repeat tests. A
cohort of animals also underwent baseline optical threshold testing before being administered
morphine (10 mg/kg, s.c.) and sham injection (isotonic saline) prior to additional optical
threshold trials, also spaced 3-days apart.

Video recordings also captured each photostimulation trial for post hoc analysis using BORIS
[17], an open-source event-logging software for video/audio coding and live observations.
Each file assessed for specific behaviours and conditions (Table 1). Analysis was performed
frame-by-frame, with behaviours coded in the pre-photostimulation period (active or