using RNA from igNeurons (day 21) following pLNA application (day 9). The primate-specific
miR-3943 served as further specificity control. Expression levels were normalized to U6 and
the “Empty” condition. Statistical analysis was performed on the logarithmic values normalized
to U6 (N = 4 differentiations, statistics: linear model ( ~ condition*target +
differentiation*target), post-hoc analysis with emmeans) d) Smoothed mean of all images used
for the synapse quantification in Fig. 1c) with circles indicating the two time points (day 21 &
day 33) at which morphology was assessed upon pLNA addition. e) Representative images of
pLNA-treated igNeurons (pLNA-1229 & pLNA-Ctrl) are displayed on the left (MAP2 in gray,
PSD95 in red and SYN1 in green). Quantification of synaptic co-clusters (PSD-95/SYN1) in
pLNA-treated igNeurons at day 21 and 33 of four independent differentiations is shown on the
right (64 images per condition and time point in total, taken from two CVS each). Shown are
violin plots of all datapoints together with the mean and standard deviation of each
differentiation. Values were transformed with the square root to account for skewed data. A
robust linear model was applied over the aggregated means of each pLNA-condition and
differentiation ( ~ condition + differentiation). Post-hoc analysis was done using emmeans. f)
Quantification of the number of secondary dendrite branches in pLNA treated igNeurons at
day21 and 33 of four independent differentiations (32 tile images per condition and time point
in total). Shown are the mean and standard deviation of all datapoints of each differentiation.
Statistical analysis was performed on the aggregated means of each pLNA-condition and
differentiation with a robust linear model ( ~ condition + differentiation). Post-hoc analysis was

done using emmeans. g) Spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic current (sEPSC) traces of pLNA-
treated igNeurons with or without NBQX. h) Example traces of sEPSC bursts recorded by

patch-clamp. i-j) Quantification of sEPSC frequency, charge transfer and amplitude (recorded
from 15 (pLNA-Ctrl) and 21 (pLNA-1229) neurons of three independent differentiations) (i) as
well as quantification of charge transfer and amplitude in recorded sEPSC bursts (obtained from
11 (pLNA-Ctrl) and 21 (pLNA-1229) neurons of three independent differentiations) (j). Shown
are box plots of all datapoints together with the mean and standard deviation of each
differentiation. Values were log-transformed and aggregated per cell. A linear model plus
emmeans were used for the statistical analyses ( ~ condition + differentiation). (* = p-value <
0.05, ** = p-value < 0.01, *** = p-value < 0.001, **** = p-value < 0.0001)

miR-1229-3p regulates genes involved in mitochondrial homeostasis
The observation that miR-1229 depletion leads to pronounced morphological and functional
changes during human excitatory synapse development prompted us to further investigate the
molecular mechanisms underlying these effects. We therefore profiled the protein-coding
transcriptome of pLNA-1229-, pLNA-181c-, pLNA-Ctrl-treated, as well as untreated
igNeurons by polyA-RNA-sequencing during the synaptic growth period at day 21 (cf. Fig. 3d,
Suppl. fig. S17-18). When comparing the transcriptome of pLNA-1229 to pLNA-Ctrl-treated
and untreated neurons (see methods), we detected 414 candidate differentially expressed genes
(cDEG) (FDR < 0.5; Fig. 4a). Strikingly, the vast majority of cDEGs were downregulated upon
miR-1229-3p inhibition, suggesting that most of the observed changes are not a primary effect
due to the loss of miRNA repression, but rather secondary gene expression changes (Fig. 4a,
Suppl. fig. S17b). To gain further insight into the cellular pathways regulated by miR-1229-3p,
we performed gene ontology (GO-term) analysis of cDEGs (Fig. 4b, Suppl. fig. S17c). Among
the top 15 biological processes enriched in the dataset, many were associated with
mitochondrial function. While most mitochondrial proteins are transcribed from the nuclear
genome, mitochondria still retain their own DNA (mtDNA) encoding for 13 proteins of the