deviation.b) Co-staining of MAP2 (grays), Mitotracker CMXRos and LAMP2 (green) at day
24. c) Confocal images of neurons stained for MAP2 (grays) and with Mitotracker CMXRos
(red) at a lower dilution (1:5000, 200nM) to allow detection of mitochondria in processes (day
23). d) Quantification of the Mitotracker entropy and the Mitotracker intensity in the soma (d),

as well as the number of mitochondria in axons (e) of day 23 neurons treated with the pLNA-
Ctrl or pLNA-1229. Images were acquired from three independent differentiations (72 pictures

for the pLNA-Ctrl and 64 pictures for the pLNA-1229 condition). Shown are violin plots of all
datapoints together with the mean and standard deviation of each differentiation. A robust linear
model was applied over the aggregated means of each condition and differentiation ( ~
condition + differentiation). Statistical differences were assessed with emmeans. Values were
transformed with the square root to account for skewness in the data. f) Example snippet of a
video acquired with the structured illumination microscope (SIM) of igNeurons incubated with
a mitochondrial dye at day 29. The widefield image is displayed on the left and the processed
version on the right. g) Mitochondrial length quantification at two time points (day 29 and day
36) from individual images obtained from the SIM-videos of three independent differentiations
(20-23 videos of each condition per time point). Shown are violin plots of all datapoints together
with the mean and standard deviation of each differentiation. Values were aggregated per video
(mean) and a linear model plus emmeans was used for the statistical analyses ( ~ condition +
differentiation). h) Scheme to illustrate neuronal energy supply by mitochondrial respiration
and glycolysis. i) Secreted lactate levels were measured from neuronal media supernatant in a

luminescence assay from four independent differentiations. A linear model with emmeans post-
hoc analysis was used for the statistics at each time point ( ~ condition + differentiation). j)

Calcium peak intensity (df / F) of human neurons recorded at day 37 from three independent
differentiations. GSK-2837808A and AlbuMAX were added to the media from day 16 on to
activate mitochondria. Shown are violin plots of all datapoints together with the mean and
standard deviation of each differentiation. Statistics were performed on the log-transformed,
aggregated values per cell (means) with a linear model accounting for the interaction effect
between the pLNA condition and the drug ( ~ pLNA*drug + differentiation). Post-hoc analysis
was done using emmeans (pLNA|drug). pLNAs were generally added to the media for all
experiments on day nine. (* = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.001, **** = p-value < 0.0001)

Discussion
The prolonged synaptogenesis period in specific areas of the human brain is likely one of the
most important determinants of human-specific cognitive and behavioral traits. In this regard,
the development of cellular systems (2D, 3D) that mimic human brain development has greatly
facilitated the discovery of human-specific aspects of synaptogenesis. Here, we modified a
neuronal differentiation protocol allowing us to profile ncRNA expression during the time
course of human excitatory synapse development at unprecedented resolution. Thereby, we
observed widespread dynamic regulation of several classes of ncRNAs during this period,
highlighting the potential importance of the ncRNA regulatory layer in human brain
development. By focusing on dynamically expressed, human-specific miRNAs, we identified
miR-1229-3p as a potential regulator of the developmental timing of excitatory synaptogenesis.
Four point-mutations within the miR-1229 gene, which occurred at the transition from great
ape to human, allowed its efficient processing to a mature miRNA. Particularly the nature of
miR-1229 being a mirtron and thereby bypassing the regulatory constraints of DROSHA
mediated processing might have facilitated this evolutionary adaptation (42). As most of the