recently evolved miRNAs, miR-1229-3p is lowly expressed and therefore likely fine-tunes the
expression of many targets within common cellular pathways (43), a notion that fits well with
the regulation of mitochondrial homeostasis by miR-1229-3p.
miR-1229-3p slows down excitatory synapse formation, a phenotype that is consistent with a
role for miR-1229-3p in human neoteny. Apparently at odds with the synaptotrophic hypothesis,
sustained miR-1229-3p inhibition leads to reduced dendritic arborization. However, recent data
from cerebellar Purkinje neurons suggests that cumulative synapse formation inhibits further

dendrite growth at later stages (44). Thus, we speculate that synaptogenesis induced by miR-
1229-3p inhibition triggers a secondary compensatory mechanism to reduce dendritic

arborization to maintain neuronal excitability within a physiological range. Mechanistically, we
provide molecular and cell biological evidence for the control of mitochondrial homeostasis
downstream of miR-1229-3p. In agreement, it has been hypothesized that mitochondria might
particularly facilitate synapse formation due to their location at presynapses and energy
provision for processes such as local translation (31).
The exact molecular mechanism involved in human synaptogenesis downstream of miR-1229-
3p remains to be determined. Among the putative miR-1229-3p targets involved in
mitochondrial function, we validated the mitophagy-inducing kinase Pink1. In addition to its
role in mitophagy, Pink1 mediated initiation of mitochondrial fission has been directly

associated with synapse development (35). However, based on our transcriptomic results, miR-
1229-3p dependent regulation of mitochondrial homeostasis likely involves an entire network

of genes controlling different aspects of mitochondrial physiology. Recently, it was shown that
reduced mitochondrial activity is associated with a delayed maturation of human neurons
compared to those of mice (28). Thus, miR-1229-3p dependent inhibition of mitophagy and
mitochondrial fission in humans might reflect a lower demand for mitochondrial rejuvenation
compared to other species. In the future, it will be important to assess whether inhibition of
mitophagy and/or mitochondrial fission is able to revert increased synaptogenesis caused by
miR-1229-3p inhibition.
From a clinical point of view, a SNP within the miR-1229 gene, which is expected to increase
miR-1229-3p expression, was recently associated with increased risk for Alzheimer’s disease
(45). Since both mitochondrial fragmentation and mitophagy deficiencies have been implicated
in Alzheimer’s disease and several other neurodegenerative disorders (38, 46), investigating the
role of the miR-1229-3p-Pink1 interaction in such disorders might be a promising direction for
future research.