Acknowledgments: We thank the laboratory of Emile van den Akker for sending us the stem
cell lines used in this study. The ribosomal depletion sequencing and proteomics was carried
out by the Functional Genomics Center Zurich (FGCZ). Viral vectors were produced by the
viral vector facility at the UZH and we particularly thank Jean-Charles Paterna for his advice.
Jana Bühler helped establishing the pLNA protocol. Koen Wentinck helped with mitochondrial
super resolution imaging in human neurons. We thank Ruilin Tian for sending his Cell Profiler

pipeline for dendrite segmentation. FUW-M2rtTA was a gift from Rudolf Jaenisch, pTet-O-
Ngn2-puro from Marius Wernig. We are grateful to Emmanuel Sonder for continuous help with

the statistics, Cristina Furler for help with cell culture work as well as Silvia Bicker and Roberto
Fiore for insightful discussions along the project and proofreading of the manuscript.
Funding: This project was in part funded by a grant from ERA-NET NEURON JTC 2019
(Altered Translation in Autism, “Altruism”; funded by SNF 32NE30_189486) to GS.
Author contributions: MS performed human neuron differentiations, immunohistochemistry,
RNA sequencing sample preparation and analysis, protein extraction, synaptogenesis and
dendritogenesis analysis, calcium imaging, helped with mitochondrial super resolution
imaging, performed mitochondrial morphology and metabolic analyses, statistical analyses and
wrote the manuscript. ALB helped with Mitotracker differentiations, staining and analysis as
well as mitochondrial super resolution imaging and analysis. SG performed luciferase reporter
gene assays. TW performed human neuron differentiations, helped with calcium imaging as
well as synaptogenesis and dendritogenesis analysis. DC wrote the script for calcium imaging
analysis. FG performed the human microRNA conservation analysis and mRNA-protein
correlation analyses in the time course experiment. TG performed circRNA analysis and helped
with statistical assessment of time course data. LZ performed label-free proteomics experiments
and data analysis. JB supervised the proteomics part of the study. PLG supervised
transcriptomic data analysis and advised on the project. JW performed and supervised the
electrophysiological recordings. TK performed and supervised the mitochondrial super
resolution imaging and advised on the mitochondrial part. GS conceptualized and supervised
the project, wrote the manuscript, and coordinated collaborative experiments.
Competing interest: The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplementary Materials:
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S23
Tables S1 to S5