Main Text:
Introduction
The human brain enables remarkable cognitive achievements that are unparalleled in any other
species. It contains more neurons and shows an increased size in comparison to the brains of
other primates, particularly in the cerebellum and cortex (1). However, this expansion
represents an expected scaling across hominids (2) which does not correlate with cognition (3),
suggesting that different mechanisms account for human-specific cognitive abilities. In this
regard, human neurons lag in development when compared to the developmental timing of other
species (a concept called human neoteny), illustrated by a slower reach of the maximal synapse
density followed by a delayed pruning of the acquired synapses (1). The resulting prolonged
synaptogenesis and synaptic plasticity period has been suggested to be key in the enhanced
social and cultural learning of humans (4).
Little is known regarding the genetic mechanisms underlying human-specific aspects of
synaptogenesis and plasticity. For example, human-specific non-synonymous base pair
substitutions in the Foxp2 gene, which is mutated in a monogenic speech disorder, lead to
increased neurite outgrowth and synaptic plasticity of corticostriatal circuits along with
behavioral phenotypes in mice (5). Moreover, expression of the human-specific Srgap2c in
mice, which originates from a gene duplication, delays synapse maturation in cortical pyramidal
neurons (1, 6, 7). However, due to the generally high conservation of protein-coding genes, it
has been suggested early on that most phenotypic differences between humans and other
primates might be rather caused by changes in non-coding DNA regulating gene expression (8).
Regulatory regions of the genome that evolved particularly fast in humans, such as the human
accelerated regions (HAR) and human gained enhancers (HGE), represent interesting

candidates in this regard (9). In addition to fulfilling gene regulatory functions in cis, non-
coding DNA is pervasively transcribed into a plethora of non-coding RNA (ncRNA) families

that control gene expression in trans, such as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and
microRNAs (miRNAs) (10). An expansion in the repertoire of miRNAs was suggested to
contribute to the increased complexity of the brain throughout evolution (11, 12). Human
miRNA expression in the brain has been profiled previously in adulthood and development
from post-mortem tissue samples (13-16). Moreover, the human-specific miR-941 has been
investigated with regards to its expression levels in the brain and putative functionality in cell
lines (17). However, despite their well-documented role in neuronal development in vertebrates
(18), it is unknown whether miRNAs control aspects of human neoteny, such as delayed
neuronal maturation and synaptogenesis.