Results
A glia-free cell neuronal cell culture model to study human excitatory synaptogenesis.
To systematically profile human miRNA expression over the course of synaptogenesis, we
established glial-free 2D cultures of human induced-pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) derived
excitatory cortical neurons by modifying a previously published Ngn2-overexpression protocol
(19) (Fig. 1a; Suppl. fig. S1a-b; materials and methods). miRNAs are highly conserved between
different cell types and across species. The omission of glial cells was therefore a prerequisite
for faithful detection of miRNAs exclusively in excitatory cortical neurons. Based on
immunostaining for excitatory synaptic marker proteins PSD95 and SYN1, neurons cultured
with our protocol (hereafter referred to as induced glial-free neurons, or igNeurons for short)
begin to form structural synapses (synaptic co-clusters) at 15 days of differentiation (Fig. 1b).
We further observed spine-like structures, a hallmark of excitatory synapse maturation, from
day 27 on (Suppl. fig. S1c). When quantifying three independent igNeurons differentiations,
we observed that PSD95-Synapsin co-cluster density steadily increases until day 27, before
reaching a plateau (Fig. 1c, Suppl. fig. S2). On the other hand, dendritic complexity expands
over the entire time course, with the steepest rise after day 27 (Suppl. fig. S3). Calcium (Ca-)
imaging upon transduction with the calcium indicator GCaMP6f shows spontaneous activity of
igNeurons from day 21 on (Fig. 1d-e). Activity can be blocked by the AMPAR antagonist
NBQX, suggesting that calcium signals are generated by synaptic activity (Suppl. Fig. S4b-c).
Patch-clamp recordings further showed that igNeurons could generate multiple action
potentials upon depolarizing current injections, confirming their ability to maintain repetitive
firing (Suppl. fig. S4d). Taken together, human igNeurons form functional excitatory synapses
within 3-4 weeks, which is comparable to previous protocols using Ngn2-induced neurons in
the presence of mouse astrocytes (19). Molecular characterization of igNeurons using ribosomal
depletion RNA-seq and label-free proteomics showed widespread gene expression changes
until day 27, consistent with prevailing morphological changes, such as the formation of
excitatory synapses, in this time window (Fig. 1f; Suppl. fig. S5-7). For example, expression of
genes encoding for excitatory synaptic proteins (SYN1, GRIA2/4, GRIN2A/B) follow the
pattern of our synaptic co-cluster and calcium imaging quantification (Suppl. fig. 6e). Plotting
the scaled expression of synapse-associated genes (Suppl. fig. S6f-g), together with the
corresponding proteins and the values obtained from the synapse co-cluster analysis (cf. Fig.
1c), shows that all three measurements follow a similar pattern (Fig. 1g), whereby RNA
expression precedes the morphological development by roughly one time point or six days (Fig.
1g). Thus, developmental gene expression profiles in igNeurons should be useful to predict
potential functional regulators of excitatory synaptogenesis.