Statistical comparisons between time points were acquired by applying post-hoc analysis with

emmeans. Shown are only statistical comparisons between neighboring time points. (** = p-
value < 0.01, *** = p-value < 0.001) d-e) Quantification of the normalized Ca-imaging

amplitude (df/F) and frequency (log) over the time course of neuronal differentiation. Measured
were two different cell lines. On average, calcium spike activity of igNeurons is higher
compared to previous protocols using Ngn2-induced neurons in the presence of mouse
astrocytes (20). f) Heatmap indicating scaled expression values of mRNAs and corresponding
proteins. Each line depicts one gene, each column one replicate. Plotted are the top 1000
significantly changing genes (FDR < 0.01) and the corresponding proteins during the neuronal
time points. In total, 11’799 genes (FDR < 0.01 & logFC > 2) and 2’839 proteins (FDR < 0.01)
changed significantly over the full time course according to the ribosomal depletion sequencing
and label-free proteomics. The igNeurons time course data can be further accessed at
https://ethz-ins.org/igNeuronsTimeCourse. g) Smoothed means of scaled RNA expression
levels of synapse-associated genes (Cluster 9, see Suppl. fig. S6f-g), the corresponding protein
expression levels and log-scaled smoothed means of the synaptic co-cluster analysis.

The ncRNAome during human excitatory synaptogenesis
Of note, mRNA and protein expression trajectories are uncorrelated for a group of genes (Suppl.
fig. S7d-e), suggesting the involvement of post-transcriptional regulatory molecules, such as
ncRNAs, in human excitatory synaptogenesis. In agreement with this, we observed extensive
developmental gene expression changes of regulatory long non-coding RNAs, such as lncRNAs
and circRNAs (Suppl. fig. S8-9), in our Ribo-minus RNA-seq dataset. However, for this initial
study, we decided to focus on miRNAs due to their well-established role in synapse
development in other vertebrates. Therefore, we performed small RNA sequencing on the same
differentiations that were processed for previous analyses (cf. Fig. 1, Suppl. fig. 10a). We
identified 339 significantly changing miRNAs over the entire time course, of which 181 were
significantly changing when considering only neuronal days (day 9 – day 40, FDR < 0.05) (Fig.
2a). In addition, we also quantified snoRNAs (with 81 significantly changing, FDR < 0.05) and
piRNAs (122 significantly changing, FDR < 0.05) (Suppl. fig. S10c). Clustering the miRNA
expression dataset according to similar expression trajectories rendered a total of 6 independent
clusters (Suppl. fig. S11a). Many miRNAs which are known to be involved in neuronal
morphogenesis based on rodent studies (e.g., miR-181, miR-124, miR-134) are found in cluster
2 (“begin up”; Suppl. fig. S11b), which features miRNAs that are rapidly induced after the stem
cell-neuron transition (day 9 onwards). In contrast, miRNAs known to be involved in synaptic
plasticity (e.g., miR-129) (18) are present in cluster 4 (“late up”; Suppl. fig. S11c) which is
characterized by a later induction (day 27 onwards).
We next attempted to characterize human-specific features of miRNA regulation in more detail.
Towards this aim, we first correlated our miRNA expression data to a smallRNA sequencing
dataset obtained from induced mouse neurons (see methods). Thereby, we found that out of the
233 miRNAs commonly detected in both datasets, 181 change significantly during human
neuronal differentiation (FDR < 0.05, all time points). Expression patterns of these 181
miRNAs were mostly correlated between human and mouse (Suppl. fig. S11d-e), except for 15

miRNAs which showed strongly anti-correlated expression dynamics, as exemplified by miR-
708 (Fig. 2b, Suppl. fig. S11f). We further searched for miRNAs whose sequences are not

conserved in other species, including non-human primates. Employing the conservative
approach of searching for orthologs in other species by reciprocal blasting of all listed human
miRNA precursors of miRbase version 22 (see methods), we found that only a small fraction