dynamics. Shown are days 0 and 10 (mouse) and days 0 and 21 (human) (see Suppl. fig S11e
for the full time course). c) Heatmap showing the percent homology of expressed human
miRNA precursors with orthologs identified by reciprocal blast in selected species. Sequences
with less than 60% homology were considered non-homologous. d) Expression examples for

human-specific miRNAs not found in other genomes (upper row) and miRNAs with a human-
specific seed mutation (lower row) during human neuronal differentiation. e) Volcano plot

showing the significance and strength of a regression of each miRNA’s expression on excitatory
synaptic co-cluster formation across days. f) Pairwise structural conservation analysis of
expressed human miRNA precursors with at least one mismatch identified in analyzed species
across primates (excluding marmoset). Plotted is the mean identity of the contrasted precursor
sequences on the x-axis and the structural conservation index generated by RNAz on the y-axis
(following an idea of McCreight et al (25), see methods). The grey dashed line indicates the
linear regression of all analyzed precursors. The black reference line (slope = 0.01 and intercept
= 0) roughly marks a threshold below which miRNA precursors can be regarded as not
structurally conserved. g) RNAfold secondary structure prediction of human pre-miR-1229 and
the putative ortholog found in chimpanzees. h) Sequence alignments of hsa-miR-1229-3p, its
seed sequence and precursors as well as orthologs among hominids (panTro6 = chimpanzee,
panGor6 = gorilla, panAbe3 = orangutan). i) Luciferase measurements of miR-1229
overexpression constructs transfected together with miRNA perfect binding site reporters in
HEK cells (N = 3, statistics: linear model ( ~ condition + replicate), post-hoc analysis with
emmeans, *** = p-value < 0.001).

Human-specific miR-1229-3p regulates the timing of excitatory synaptogenesis.
Using microRNA qPCR and single-molecule fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH), we
confirmed that miR-1229-3p is dynamically expressed over the course of human neuron
differentiation, in a similar way as miR-181c, a known regulator of neuronal morphogenesis in
rodents (Fig. 3a-b). Together with the unique evolutionary features described above, this led us
to consider the possibility that miR-1229-3p might be involved in the regulation of excitatory
synapse development of human neurons. To interfere with miR-1229-3p expression, we

delivered locked nucleic acid (LNA) modified antisense oligonucleotides directed against miR-
1229-3p (pLNA-1229) to igNeurons via bath application in the culture media. In addition, we

included pLNAs directed against miR-181c-3p (pLNA-181) or a corresponding scrambled
control sequence (pLNA-Ctrl) in our experiments. Using a fluorescently labelled pLNA-Ctrl,
we confirmed that pLNAs are taken up at nearly 100% efficiency, remain stable inside the cells
and don’t cause detrimental effects on the neuron morphology even at high concentrations
(Suppl. fig. S13). miRNA qPCR further confirmed that the pLNAs specifically decrease the
expression of the cognate miRNA (Fig. 3c).
To test the functional role of miR-1229-3p over the course of excitatory synapse development,
we applied pLNAs from day 9 on and monitored synaptic co-cluster density and
dendritogenesis. We focused on two time points, one during the linear synaptic growth phase
(day 21) and one during the plateau phase (day 33) (Fig. 3d).

Remarkably, synapse co-cluster density analysis revealed a significant increase of synaptic co-
clusters at day 21 upon depletion of miR-1229-3p compared to the pLNA-Ctrl and pLNA-181

conditions. This effect was no longer seen at day 33 (Fig. 3e, Suppl. fig. S14a). Examining
PSD95 and SYN1 density individually showed that increased synapse density in pLNA-1229
treated neurons is mostly driven by enhanced presynaptic differentiation (Suppl. fig. S14b-e).
Inhibition of miR-181c-5p showed a trend towards more synapses at the plateau phase (day 33),