‘Are you even listening?’ - EEG-based
detection of absolute auditory attention to
natural speech with application to
neuro-steered hearing devices

Arnout Roebben1,∗

, Nicolas Heintz1,2

, Simon Geirnaert1,2

, Tom Francart2

and Alexander Bertrand1,3

Abstract

In this study, we use electroencephalography (EEG) recordings to perform absolute auditory
attention detection (aAAD), i.e., determine whether a subject is actively listening to a presented
speech stimulus or not. More precisely, we aim to discriminate between an active listening
condition, and a distractor condition where subjects passively listen to the speech stimulus
while performing another cognitive task. To this end, we re-use an existing EEG dataset where
the subjects watch a silent movie as a distractor condition, and introduce a new EEG dataset with
two other distractor conditions (silently reading a text and performing arithmetic exercises). We
focus on two EEG features, namely neural envelope tracking (NET) and spectral entropy (SE).
We find significantly higher NET and lower SE in the active listening condition compared
to the distractor conditions, which for the SE is the reverse of what was previously found
for an active listening versus passive listening condition (without any distractors). In addition,
aAAD is used in the context of a selective auditory attention decoding (sAAD) task, where
the goal is to decode to which of two competing speakers the subject is attending, which is a
core task in the context of so-called neuro-steered hearing devices. We show that evaluating
sAAD performance only on segments of active listening improves sAAD performance when
detecting these active listening segments as having higher NET, whereas the reverse trend is
observed when detecting these segments as having lower SE. We conclude that NET is a more
reliable metric for aAAD as it is consistently higher for the active listening condition, whereas
the relation of the SE between the active listening and passive listening conditions seems to
depend on the nature of the distractor task. Consequently, NET shows the most promise for
aAAD and to detect auditory inattentive segments in neuro-steered hearing devices.

Index Terms

Absolute auditory attention detection, Selective auditory attention decoding, EEG, Neural
envelope tracking, Spectral entropy, Neuro-steered hearing device, Brain-computer interface.

I. INTRODUCTION

The human auditory system is able to focus on a single speaker of interest while
filtering out the speech of competing speakers in a so-called cocktail party scenario. This
process is often referred to as selective (auditory) attention. Recently, there has been
1KU Leuven, Dept. Electrical Engineering (ESAT), Stadius Center for Dynamical Systems, Signal Processing and
Data Analytics, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium.
∗
arnout.roebben@esat.kuleuven.be
2KU Leuven, Dept. of Neurosciences, ExpORL. Herestraat 49 bus 721, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
3Leuven.AI - KU Leuven institute for AI