channels is utilised as an active listening feature. The PSD estimate is calculated
using the multitaper spectral analysis using 7 Slepian tapers with a frequency spacing
of 0.5 Hz [33].
C. Experimental setup
1) Absolute auditory attention detection: To study how the NET and SE features vary
across the different active listening and distractor conditions, a 10-fold cross-validation

is conducted per subject on Dataset I and Dataset II, where the folds are split chronolog-
ically. Regarding the NET, the decoder is trained solely on the active listening data of

the left-in folds in order to reconstruct the speech envelope when attending to the speech
stimulus, whereas regarding the SE, no training phase is required. The left-out fold is
partitioned into windows, quantifying the amount of time given to decide whether the
subject is in a state of active listening. To this end, window lengths of 5 s, 10 s, 20 s, 30 s
and 60 s are used.
Subsequently, the classification accuracy of the features, defined as the ratio of the
number of correctly predicted windows and the total amount of windows, is analysed to
discriminate between high versus low attention windows. To this end, an equal amount of
active and passive listening windows are present. A linear discriminant analysis (LDA)
classifier is used, although other classifiers could be used as well [34]. This LDA classifier
is trained using a nested 10-fold cross-validation procedure, where the folds are split
chronologically. As for the NET, the covariance matrix estimate in the LDA classifier is
regularised by adding a weighted identity matrix to the estimate according to [31].
2) Combination of aAAD and sAAD: Next, we aim to analyse whether aAAD can
be incorporated into an sAAD framework. A 10-fold cross-validation is conducted on

the sAAD task of Dataset III, where the folds are split chronologically and the left-
out folds are split into 60 s windows. The performance of these sAAD decoders is

evaluated on a proportion of the left-out folds spanning the x%, x = 0, . . . , 100, of
the segments signalled by the NET and SE features as having the highest absolute
auditory attention. Regarding the NET, this selection of active listening segments is
performed by applying the sAAD decoders on the left-out folds, computing the maximum
of the correlation between the decoder output


yˆ and both speech envelopes y1 and y2

max
ρ

yˆ, y
(val)
1

, ρ
yˆ, y
(val)
2
 over 60 s windows, and selecting the segments which
have the x% highest values of this feature. Regarding the SE, the x% lowest SE values
on the left-out folds are selected in correspondence to the results on Dataset I and Dataset
II as will be detailed infra. We hypothesise that by evaluating the sAAD performance
only when subjects are signalled to be actively listening, the sAAD performance will
increase as segments are removed where the subjects are not actively listening to any
speech stimulus and no truthful sAAD decision can be made.
D. Hypothesis tests
Hypothesis tests are performed using the two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test [35]

and the resulting p-values are corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-
Hochberg correction [36]. To assess the statistical significance of slopes, a linear regres-
sion model is fitted, and the t-test [37] on the coefficient corresponding to the slope

is performed under the null hypothesis that the corresponding coefficient is zero. All
hypothesis tests are performed with respect to a significance level α = 0.05.