V. RESULTS
A. Absolute auditory attention detection
Fig. 3 shows the individual data points and the per-subject averages, across windows
and folds, for the cross-validation on Dataset I and Dataset II for the 10 s and 30 s
windows. The two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test on the per-subject averages indicates
a significant difference between the active listening and distractor conditions for both
the NET and SE features (max(p) = 0.047). Herein, the NET correlations attain higher
values in the active listening than in the distractor conditions, whereas the SE attains
lower values in the active listening than in the distractor conditions. For the NET, these
results are consistent with [11], where higher NET correlations were found for subjects
actively listening than for subjects passively listening while watching a silent movie.
Nevertheless, while [11] used artificial, standardised sentences, we used natural speech
and introduced two new distractor tasks. For the SE, the reverse trend is observed to [13],
where higher SE values were found to correlate with active listening than with passive
listening without any distractor.
These feature values correspond to classification accuracies using the LDA classifier as
shown in Fig. 4. Both the NET and the SE features outperform chance level, computed
as the upper bound of a 95% one-sided confidence interval of a binomial distribution
with success rate 0.5. Both features are subsequently able to discriminate between the
active and passive listening condition, wherein the NET visually seems to suffer more
from shorter window lengths than the SE.
B. Combination of aAAD and sAAD
Fig. 5 shows the sAAD accuracy evaluated on the x%, x = 0, . . . , 100, highest

active listening segments signalled as the highest NET correlation and lowest SE seg-
ments, in correspondence with the results on Dataset I and Dataset II. As hypothesised,

when evaluating the sAAD performance on the highest NET correlation segments, the
sAAD accuracy increases as the proportion of the validation set decreases, corresponding
to keeping the x% highest attention windows. This trend is, furthermore, significant
(max(p) = 7.00 · 10−7

). However, evaluating sAAD performance on the lowest SE seg-
ments, contrary to the results on Dataset I and II, shows a significant negative trend

when decreasing the proportion of the validation set used (max(p) = 0.0023). This trend
is different from the SE results on Dataset I and Dataset II, but consistent with the results
of [13].

VI. DISCUSSION

As shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, both the NET and SE features yield significant
differences between the active listening and distractor conditions. Nevertheless, while
the NET correlations are consistently higher in the active listening condition than in the
distractor conditions in line with [11], this relation is inconsistent for the SE. Indeed,
contrary to the findings in [13], where a higher SE is found for the active listening
condition than for a passive (not performing any task) condition, the results on Dataset
I and Dataset II show a higher SE on the movie watching, arithmetic exercise solving
and text reading distractor conditions (with passive listening) than on the active listening
condition without such distractor task. In agreement with these results the sAAD accuracy