correlations, on the contrary, do not suffer from this phenomenon of relative change
between conditions since this technique is directly tied to the task of discriminating active
versus passive listening by explicitly trying to reconstruct features of the presented speech
stimulus, which is expected to become less accurate when the subject is not actively
attending the speech. As a result, although the NET correlation accuracies seem lower
than the SE classification in Fig. 4, the NET correlations seem better tailored to the
aAAD and sAAD tasks.
In Fig. 4, the results on Dataset I attain higher accuracies than in Dataset II, possibly
due to differences in distractor conditions, or data quality. Furthermore, although the
experiment of Dataset I was conducted in a non-radio frequency shielded room, both
features significantly discriminate between the active and passive listening conditions.
This indicates that this technology is viable in everyday environments, outside controlled
radio frequency shielded laboratories.

VII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have estimated the modulation of active listening to speech, a task
referred to as absolute auditory attention detection (aAAD). Both neural envelope tracking
(NET) and spectral entropy (SE) features were used to perform this aAAD task. To this
end, we have introduced a new dataset containing an active listening condition, as well
as distractor conditions during which the subject silently reads a text or solves arithmetic
exercises. Next to this new dataset, we have also used an existing dataset where the
distractor condition consisted of watching a silent movie. In both datasets and all distractor
conditions, we have found that the NET and SE features are both able to discriminate
between active listening versus distractor (i.e., passive listening) conditions. Whereas
the NET increases from the active listening condition to the distractor conditions, the
alpha and beta band SE in the frontal, parietal-occipital, and occipital channels decreases
from the active listening condition to the distractor conditions. Only evaluating sAAD
performance on segments of high NET shows an increased selective auditory attention
decoding (sAAD) accuracy, whereas evaluating on segments of low SE shows the reverse
trend. Thus, likely, the SE rather relates to the cognitive load required for each task than
the actual absolute auditory attention, whereas the NET correlations directly relate to
(in)attention to the stimulus and are consistent across several datasets and tasks. The
NET, thus, seems the better option to estimate absolute auditory attention, and appears
to be more suited to use in conjunction with an sAAD task in neuro-steered hearing
devices.

APPENDIX

Segments are annotated as eye artefacts if the total power in the frontal channels (Fp1,
AF7, AF3, Fpz, Fp2, AF8, AF4 and Afz for the 64-channel EEG cap, and Fp1, Fp2 and
Fpz for the 24-channel EEG cap.) is higher than 5 times the baseline power in those
channels, according to the procedure of [11].

Regarding the muscle artefact detection, the EEG signal is first filtered using a zero-
phase Chesbyshev type 2 filter bandpass filter with cutoff frequencies between 20 Hz and

60 Hz. Segments are thereafter annotated as muscle artefacts if the total power of this
filtered EEG signal in the channels at the side of the head (AF7, F7, F5, FT7, FC5, T7,
C5, TP7, CP5, P7, P5, P9, PO7, AF8, F6, F8, FC6, FT8, C6, T8, CP6, TP8, P6, P8,