A. Datasets
In this work, we utilise three datasets: Dataset I is a newly recorded dataset that deals
with subjects attending to an auditory stimulus versus subjects ignoring that stimulus
while focusing on silently reading a text or solving arithmetic exercises. Dataset II
originates from [11] where subjects were either instructed to attend to an auditory stimulus
or to ignore that stimulus while focusing on a silent movie. Finally, Dataset III is an sAAD
dataset of [21].
1) Dataset I: Goal: The goal of this experiment is to investigate the neural differences
between a setting where the subject is actively listening to a speech stimulus, and a
distractor condition where the subject ignores the auditory stimulus while focusing on
silently reading a text or solving arithmetic exercises.
Subjects: 10 Dutch-speaking subjects (5 male, 5 female), between 21 and 27 years old,
participated in the experiment. These subjects were unpaid volunteers and signed an
informed consent, approved by the Social-Societal Ethics Committee at KU Leuven.
Experiments were conducted according to these regulations.
Equipment: A 24-channel Smarting mobile EEG recording system was utilised [22].
The experiment was conducted in a non-radio frequency shielded room and the scalp of
the subjects was treated with electroconductive gel while fitting the EEG cap. Raw EEG
data were converted into MATLAB-compatible files using OpenVibe software [23].
Presentation structure: The speech stimuli consisted of children stories in Dutch [24].
The experiment consisted of four phases, and a different story was used in each phase. The
narrators were all male, except in phase two. An overview of the presentation structure
within each phase can be found in Fig. 2. In the first phase, the subjects were instructed
to listen to a story (‘Bianca en Nero’) for 20 minutes, referred to as ‘Audio’ in Fig. 2. To
engage the subjects, they were told upfront that a questionnaire, concerning the content
of that auditory fragment, had to be filled in at the end of the phase.
In the second phase, the subjects again had to listen to a story (‘Ver van het kleine
paradijs’) for 11 minutes, after which a questionnaire had to be filled in about the content
of the fragment. However, during this second phase, specific tasks were displayed on a
computer screen at certain times to manipulate the attention to the speech. A first task
consisted in solving as many arithmetic exercises (e.g., 1012 − 448 = 564) as possible
within one minute, in order to reduce the attention to the speech. The subjects were
informed that no questions in the questionnaire would originate from those parts of the
story during which the arithmetic exercises had to be conducted. As a second task, the
subjects were informed that they should listen even more attentively for one minute
since questions were certainly to be asked about this following minute of the fragment,
requiring increased attention to the speech. The presentation structure of this phase 2 is
shown in Fig. 2, where ‘Mathematics’ refers to segments where subjects were instructed
to solve arithmetic exercises and where ‘Question’ refers to segments where subjects
were informed that a question had to be answered about the next minute in the story.
The third phase used the same setup as the second phase, but the presentation structure
was changed as shown in Fig. 2 and a different story stimulus was used (‘Milan’).
In a final, fourth phase, the subjects were instructed to focus on silently reading a text
while ignoring the auditory stimulus (‘Eline’), a condition referred to as ‘Text’ in Fig. 2.
This text was provided as a printed document, and consisted of a Dutch version of the
short story ‘Vergif’ written by Roald Dahl [25]. As before, subjects were informed in