advance to fill in a questionnaire at the end of the fragment. In this phase, however, the
questionnaire related solely to the content of the text, resulting in a no-attention condition
to the speech. Between each of the four phases, a short pause was inserted to give the
subjects time to fill in the corresponding questionnaires. The stories were played through
the stereo speakers of a laptop. At the start of the experiment, the subjects could determine
the volume themselves, such that they were comfortable during the experiments. To keep
the subjects motivated throughout the experiment, the subjects were informed that a gift
card was to be handed out to the three best-scoring participants on the combined results
of the questionnaires and arithmetic exercises. No preprocessing of the auditory stimuli
took place before presenting them to the subjects.

Fig. 2. The presentation structure of Dataset I. During phase 1, the subjects were instructed to attend an auditory
stimulus and answer questions about the content afterwards (‘Audio’). During phase 2 and phase 3, this structure was
interleaved with specific tasks to be completed in order to modulate the subjects’ state of auditory attention. During
the ‘Mathematics’ task, subjects needed to solve arithmetic exercises, reducing the auditory attention. During the
‘Question’ task, subjects needed to increase their auditory attention as a question certainly was to be asked about that
part of the fragment. During phase 4, the subjects were instructed to silently read a text while ignoring the auditory
stimulus.
2) Dataset II: Dataset II is a subset of the dataset used in [11]. This subset consists of 7
normal-hearing subjects, who all participated in two experiments. In the first experiment,
subjects were instructed to attend a Dutch continuous auditory stimulus (story ‘Milan’).
In the second experiment, the subjects were instructed to attend a silent, subtitled cartoon
movie while ignoring an auditory stimulus. For each subject, about 15 minutes of data
are available for both conditions. The EEG data consist of 64 channels. The interested
reader can find a more detailed description of this dataset in [11].

3) Dataset III: Dataset III corresponds to the sAAD dataset of [21]. Herein, 16 normal-
hearing subjects were exposed to a competing speaker scenario with two speakers, and

were instructed to attend to one of the speakers while ignoring the other one. As auditory
stimuli, four Dutch children’s stories were used. In total, approximately 72 minutes of
recorded data per subject are available, using a 64-channel EEG cap. A more detailed
description of this dataset can be found in [2].
In the present study, we do not further consider the segments corresponding to the
‘Question’ condition of Dataset I (green segments in Fig. 2), to ensure a consistent
active listening condition between Dataset I and Dataset II. Furthermore, the data of the