minority of their birth cohort. Most individuals do not reach the age of 85, and those who do may
be physiologically or behaviorally unusual (Silverman and Schmeidler et al., 2018; Kawas,
Legdeur, & Corrada, 2021); even within oldest-old adults, an estimated 18-35% live with
dementia (Gardner, Valcour, & Yaffe, 2013) and an additional 16-23% live with Mild Cognitive
Impairment (Peltz et al., 2012; Yaffe et al., 2011). That is, with increasing age, the normative
adult experiences accumulating age-related changes and neuropathological burden and
concomitant cognitive decline, ultimately falling below a threshold required to sustain functional
performance (Hertzog et al., 2008). The hypothesized relationship to GABA is visualized in
Figure 3: smoothed extracted spline data are superimposed over the conceptual model proposed

by Hertzog (2008). The trajectory of GABA across the lifespan shows good agreement with age-
related cognitive decline, consistent with GABA levels representing a physiological constraint,

below which cognition might transition to a dysfunctional state. Conversely, the attenuated slope
of age-related GABA differences in our participants suggests that our participants show the
range of GABA levels expected in the absence of significant age-related cognitive dysfunction.

We characterize this as a “surviving and thriving” effect, in which the healthy and high-
performing individuals included in a nonclinical sample exist within a relatively small range of

variation of the outcome of interest.
While MRS does not identify the mechanism underlying age-related decline in GABA,
preclinical and postmortem research have identified potential cellular and molecular drivers.
GABAergic interneurons and GABA-synthesizing enzymes GAD65 and GAD67 are depleted in
rodent models of aging (reviewed in Rozycka and Liguz-Lecznar, 2017), and cortical GAD65 is
reduced in older adults in postmortem human studies (Pinto et al., 2010). Depletion of GABA
may in turn disrupt excitatory-inhibitory balance, leaving the brain vulnerable to excitotoxic
injury.