functioning, other aspects of brain health may explain more variance in cognition in the oldest-
old. This possibility remains to be tested. Third, we did not compare our cognitively-intact

sample to oldest-old adults with MCI or dementia; we hypothesize that impaired oldest-old
adults would show lower GABA levels. Fourth, because individual sex, race/ethnicity, and
education data were unavailable for the eight published datasets, we were unable to assess the
impact of demographic characteristics on our findings. Prior studies have demonstrated that the
impact of age on GABA may be greater in women (Gao et al., 2013) and that GABA may be
associated with cognition in older women, but not older men (Jiménez-Balado et al., 2021).
Furthermore, our sample was predominantly White and well-educated. Further research should
consider sex, and potentially environmental factors such as socioeconomic status, directly.
Additionally, potential lifestyle influences on GABA, such as lifetime substance use, are beyond
the scope of the present analysis. Finally, we analyzed only a small number of participants over
the age of 95, resulting in greater uncertainty regarding the trajectory of GABA differences after
95 (and a wider credible interval).
In conclusion, we observed attenuation of the slope of age-related differences in cortical
GABA concentrations in oldest-old age, consistent with a minimum GABA “floor”
physiologically necessary to sustain cognitive function. This lower limit may also reflect a state
below which excitotoxic processes accelerate. The current analysis provides a descriptive
benchmark for future studies examining GABA change in the oldest-old population; additionally,
this analysis highlights the impact of study inclusion criteria and survivorship on observed
physiological stability in oldest-old age.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Design
206 community-dwelling adults aged 85 to 99 were recruited at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham, the University of Florida, the University of Miami, and the University of Arizona
as part of a larger study of cognition and brain function in oldest-old adults (McKnight Brain
Aging Registry), funded by the Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Foundation. Sites have been
designated Site 1-Site 4 to protect participant anonymity. Exclusion criteria included Mild
Cognitive Impairment (MCI) or dementia, a history of neurological disease, and a history of
intractable psychiatric disorders. Participants were screened for MCI by research coordinators
using the Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status-Modified (TICS-M) and Montreal Cognitive
Assessment (MoCA): scores of 28 or below on the TICS-M and 22 or below on the MoCA
resulted in a consensus conference to assess cognitive performance, aided by a neurologist’s
evaluation. All participants gave informed consent and were compensated for their participation.
Study procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the University of
Alabama at Birmingham (#X160113004), University of Florida (#201300162), University of
Miami (#20151783) and University of Arizona (#1601318818) and conformed to the standards
of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Of the 206 participants recruited, MEGA-PRESS MRS data were acquired from 164 individuals.
39 scans were corrupted or failed visual quality inspection. To ensure that all participants were