‘Mind in Vitro’ platforms: Versatile, scalable, robust and open
solutions to interfacing with living neurons
Xiaotian Zhang, Zhi Dou, Seung-Hyun Kim, Gaurav Upadhyay, Daniel Havert, Sehong Kang,
Kimia Kazemi, Kai-Yu Huang, Onur Aydin, Raymond Huang, Saeedur Rahman, Austin Ellis-Mohr,
Hayden A. Noblet, Ki H. Lim, Hee Jung Chung, Howard J. Gritton, M. Taher A. Saif, Hyun Joon Kong,
John M. Beggs, Mattia Gazzola*
Xiaotian Zhang, Onur Aydin, Hee Jung Chung, M. Taher A. Saif, Hyun Joon Kong and Mattia Gazzola
Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
Email Address: mgazzola@illinois.edu
Zhi Dou, Seung-Hyun Kim, Gaurav Upadhyay, Sehong Kang, Kimia Kazemi,
Raymond Huang, Saeedur Rahman, M. Taher A. Saif and Mattia Gazzola
Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
Daniel Havert and John M. Beggs
Department of Physics, Indiana University Bloomington
Bloomington, IN 47405
Kai-Yu Huang and Hyun Joon Kong
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
Austin Ellis-Mohr
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
Hayden A. Noblet, Ki H. Lim and Hee Jung Chung
Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
Hayden A. Noblet and Hee Jung Chung
Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
Hee Jung Chung and Howard J. Gritton
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
Howard J. Gritton
Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
Urbana, IL 61802
Abstract. Motivated by the unexplored potential of in vitro neural systems for computing, and by the corresponding need of versatile,
scalable interfaces for multimodal interaction, we present an accurate, modular, fully customizable and portable recording/stimulation
solution that can be easily fabricated, robustly operated, and broadly disseminated. A reconfigurable platform that works across
multiple industry standards enables a complete signal chain, from neural substrates sampled through high-density Micro-Electrode
Arrays (MEAs) to data acquisition, downstream analysis and cloud storage. Built-in modularity supports the seamless integration
of electrical/optical stimulation and fluidic interfaces. Custom MEA fabrication leverages maskless photolithography, favoring the
rapid prototyping of a variety of configurations and spatial topologies. Through a native analysis and management software suite, the
utility and robustness of our system is demonstrated across neural cultures and applications, including embryonic stem cell-derived and
primary neurons, organotypic brain slices, 3D engineered tissue mimics, concurrent calcium imaging and long-term recording. Overall,
our technology, termed ‘Mind in Vitro’ to underscore the computing inspiration, provides an end-to-end solution that can be widely
deployed due to its affordable (>10X cost-reduction) and open-source nature, catering to the expanding needs of both conventional and
unconventional electrophysiology.

1