such functionalities on the supercomputing facility Frontera at the Texas Advanced Computing Center.
4.2 Higher dimensional neural systems
While 2D cultures allow for initial characterization and understanding of a networked cellular system, their lack
of 3D organization does not fully capitalize on neurons’ potential for enhanced connectivity, compute density, or
miniaturization, nor can they recapitulate physiological architectures. Here, we demonstrate our platform in a
higher-dimensional context, by considering both ex vivo tissue and 3D engineered mimics.
Organotypic brain slices. Organotypic cultures are prepared from slices of rat cortex that are 450μm thick.
While these compress to about 100μm during incubation, they nevertheless preserve an intrinsic connectivity
structure which is lacking in the 2D monolayer cultures described above. At the same time, brain slices do not
possess a clear 3D shape like the tissue mimics we will discuss below. To highlight this distinction, we consider
organotypic cultures to be of intermediate dimension (2.5D). Relative to 2D cultures, experimentation with higher
dimensional systems poses additional challenges such as ensuring that the tissue is broadly and firmly in contact
with the microelectrodes, as well as provisions for continuous media, oxygen or drugs replacement. To address
these challenges, we augment our system through a 3D printed fluidic interface that is modularly integrated via
accessory posts protruding from the top acrylic layer (Fig. 5a). The printed apparatus hosts a pair of L-shape fluid
delivery cannulas, connected to a peristaltic pump for continuous media delivery and aspiration. This can be further
extended to support a ‘plug’ system whereby a biocompatible nylon filter mesh can be gradually lowered towards
the tissue to apply a gentle pressure onto it, thus enhancing contact across the electrodes surface.
Using this particular accessory, we perform longitudinal recordings in mature organotypic cortex cultures. As
previously discussed, this preparation is commonly employed because it preserves much of the intrinsic tissue
structure found in vivo, like cortical layers and corresponding cell types. Further, it facilitates in-depth culture
manipulation via localized drug delivery, optical control and cell identity imaging, which are difficult to perform
in vivo. Cortical tissue is dissected from rat pups on postnatal day 5. These slice cultures are incubated for 26
days before transferring the slices to the MEA-chips for recording (protocol in Section 6.2). For this application
we utilize the curved MEA of Section 3 to conform to the natural morphology of the region of interest (Fig. 5b).
Neural activity recorded from a 5μm-MEA sample is presented in Fig. 5c, illustrating spontaneous spiking events as
a raster plot, together with corresponding waveforms (spike cutouts). We use our software to isolate both multi-unit
activity (MUA) and single-unit activity (SUA) across the electrode array, and find that MUA is highly synchronized
across the cortical culture, consistent with significantly correlated bursting activity.
In addition to spontaneous recordings, we employ the same biphasic stimulation protocol of Section 4.1 to study
the tissue neural response. Activity in the sample is found to be strongly driven by the electrical stimulation (the
red dashed line overlaid to the raster plot) across the entire 128-channel array. We note here that the use of curved
MEAs also allows for consistent alignment of electrode sites to anatomical points of reference across the tissue. This
enhances yield and increases usability, making it easier to reliably place and align the tissue to enhance experimental
consistency across samples. Good alignment and yield are demonstrated in Fig. 5d, where recorded activity (firing
rates) is mapped to the electrodes’ physical locations.
Engineered tissue mimics. While organotypic slices are representative of the intrinsic connectivity of brain
tissue, engineered mimics potentially allow the realization of 3D neural architectures of desired size, topology
and composition. This, combined with custom MEAs for interfacing, provides a unique opportunity to extend
applications from neuroscience to engineering devices for sensing, processing and computing. We present here two
different methods of bio-fabricating 3D engineered neural tissue mimics (NTMs), and demonstrate their integration
in our platforms.
We first extend our 2D monolayer cultures to 3D NTMs by mixing ESC-MNs with 6mg/ml Matrigel (ECM). Here,
we showcase the control over our NTM geometry by seeding the cell-ECM mixture into PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane)
molds placed on our multi-well MEAs (Fig. 3c). Molds are fabricated with cavities of different shapes, allowing the
mixtures to polymerize into 3D neural constructs of prescribed configuration (Fig. 5e). To confirm the success of
the NTM fabrication, fluorescence imaging is performed to visualize live neurons’ GFP signals. As illustrated in
Fig. 5e, neurons are evenly distributed within the constructs, and network formation is observed. We then deploy
our platform for electrophysiology recording. Figure 5f illustrates the activity obtained from an NTM sample, where
spikes and synchronized events are detected across multiple channels. We note that fewer active channels are seen
here compared to 2D neural cultures. Indeed, since neurons are distributed in three-dimensional space the number
of cells residing at the bottom of the tissue is reduced, rendering activity less detectable by the electrodes.