(a)

contact pad
400μm ITO MEA
-0.1
0
0.1

-50
0
50

120

-20
0
20

0 20 40 60 80 80

time (s)

∆F/F LFP μV MUA μV
-2 -1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1

-60
-40
-20
0
20
40

0 1 2 3 4
time (s)
∆F/F

LFP μV

track

t=56.1s t=56.8s
(b) ROI
ch. 117

ch. 117
ch. 117
ROI

Figure 6: Alteration of the recording platform to facilitate concurrent electrophysiology and microscopic imaging. (a) Placing
of the recording device inside an inverted microscopic chamber. A thin layer of aluminum mesh is fabricated to wrap around the device and
serve as Faraday cage. ITO MEAs and PNs are utilized in this experiment. (b) Examples of simultaneously acquired fluorescence signal and
electrophysiology data. Video analysis is performed within a ROI of 0.57×0.82mm, while electrical data are recorded from a channel located near
the center of the ROI. Left inset: A peak in the ∆F/F0 signal and a LFP event share similar temporal characteristics, where a rapid initiation
period (<150ms) is followed by a gradual restoring phase (1s for LFP and 3s for ∆F/F0). We align the two signals according to their first edge.
Right inset: snapshots of the fluorescence signal before and during a burst event.
Alternatively, NTMs can also be realized through the creation of 3D neural spheroids. Formed from embryonic
stem cells, and further differentiated into neural lineage, these spheroids recapitulate physiologically relevant features
such as cellular and extracellular matrix composition [56]. We fabricate the neural spheroids by first obtaining
embryoid bodies following the standard SFEBq method [57], and then differentiating them into cortical lineage by
selective Shh (via cyclopamine) and Wnt pathway (via IWP-2) inhibition. The resulting spheroids are maintained
in a suspension culture for 20 days before seeding on MEAs for recording (Fig. 5g). Here, in order to showcase the
native platform compatibility with commercial MEAs, we specifically employ one from the Multichannel system
60MEA series. Figure 5g depicts a microscopic image taken on day 7 after seeding, illustrating a spheroid extending
neurites on the commercial MEA. Corresponding recordings on day 12 after seeding demonstrate the successful
detection of neural firing (Fig. 5h).
4.3 Concurrent calcium imaging
A unique aspect of a fully-customizable system is that its components can be continuously adapted to comply with
existing industrial standards, or new standards as they emerge, while retaining the same core infrastructure. We
showcase this here by reshaping our platform to allow concurrent calcium imaging. We alter the design of Fig. 1a
to match the dimensions of a standard 96-well microplate (Society for Biomolecular Screening, SBS), enabling
the integration with inverted microscopic chambers. As seen in Fig. 6a, a new PCB interface that accommodates
a single 128-channel recording headstage (rather than two 64-channel headstages as in Fig. 1b) is mounted onto
reshaped acrylic layers to deliver a compact, SBS-compatible layout.

Upon integration within the microscope chamber (Fig. 6a), we proceed with testing the simultaneous electro-
physiology and calcium imaging in 2D cultures of primary hippocampal neurons (PNs). PN cells utilized in this

experiment are collected from embryonic rat brains (E18-E19) and cultured on MEAs following the same ESC-MNs
seeding protocol. PNs are chosen because, unlike ESC-MNs, they do not express constitutive fluorescent reporters,
and therefore allow the undisturbed visualization of the calcium signal. For this specific application we employ
transparent MEAs. These are microfabricated following the same procedure described in Section 3, except for
the addition of an annealing process after the ITO deposition to enhance transmittance and conductivity [58].
Annealing is carried out by placing the MEA sample in a vacuum chamber at 450◦C for 1 hour, leading to ITO
transmittance of ∼ 80% and resistivity of ∼ 4.5e

−4Ωcm (see SI), enabling both optical electrical measurements.
We perform concurrent measurements 12 days after seeding. Cells are loaded with the calcium indicator
Oregon Green 488, following manufacturer’s recommendations (Section 6.3). The loaded sample is then placed in
our platform within the microscopic chamber, ready for measurement. After setting the laser source, video and