electrophysiology recording of the culture’s spontaneous activity are simultaneously acquired, and offline analyzed.
A representative example of post-processed signals is illustrated in Fig. 6b. Calcium activity is characterized through
changes in fluorescent intensity (∆F/F0, defined in Section 6.3) within a region of interest (ROI), which in turn
determines the microelectrodes to be considered. Each peak in the fluorescence plot corresponds to a culture-wide
burst event, during which we can observe a higher-intensity calcium signal across the network, relative to the rest
state (illustrated in the inset images). Detected electrical signals are processed separately to reveal local field
potentials (LFPs) and MUA during bursts, demonstrating that recording is not affected by laser-induced artifacts.
Further, LFPs and MUA are found to precisely align temporally, confirming simultaneous neural responses across
modalities. In a context where genetic optical markers continue to provide new avenues to probe cellular dynamics
at high-spatial resolutions, complementary high-temporal resolution electrophysiology is seen as a powerful feature.
4.4 Portability, robustness and reproducibility
Finally, we expand our discussion to emphasize our platform’s portability, robustness and reproducibility, key factors
for broad dissemination.
Electrophysiology measurements are delicate and sensitive to hardware setup and testing environment, rendering
the portability of recording solutions rarely reported or discussed (Fig. 2). Here, we demonstrate this capability
through off-site recordings of organotypic brain slices prepared and cultured in Prof. Beggs lab at Indiana
University Bloomington (presented in Section 4.2). To this end, a platform in use at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) is disassembled and ground transported to Bloomington (∼180 miles, ∼ 3-hours
drive). As presented in Fig. S5 in the SI, our system, after transportation, could be easily reassembled and deployed
for experiments within half an hour. This demonstration compounds the above described case studies, further
underscoring the robustness, versatility and accuracy of our systems across a variety of conditions.
These favorable features led us to collect nearly 1000 hours of recording experiments in one year, amounting
to tens of TB of data. This ability has motivated external researchers to adopt our systems as an alternative to
commercial devices, providing us with the opportunity of testing the independent reproducibility and implementation
of our platforms. Following our open-source designs and protocols, a graduate student from Prof. Saif lab at UIUC,
with little experience in electronics and fabrication and without supervision, was able to assemble a working system
within two weeks (Fig. S7 in SI).
5 Conclusion
We have presented a versatile, scalable and multi-modal electrophysiology solution, delivering a customizable signal
pipeline stretching from in vitro neural substrates to cloud computing. Our approach significantly lowers barriers to
entry, through the open-sourcing of designs, software and protocols, and via (over) ten-fold cost reductions. The
utility of our platforms is showcased through a comprehensive set of demonstrations involving a variety of cell types
and stimulation modalities, two- and three-dimensional systems, concurrent imaging and long-term recording. This
study provides a launching pad to broaden the electrophysiology domain, both in terms of users and applications,
and motivates us to further innovate across scale and functionalities, paving the way to new biophysical discovery
and in vitro technologies.