1 Introduction
Neural tissue supports a host of information processes fundamental to many organisms, from autonomic body
functions to motion, sensing and high-level reasoning [1, 2, 3]. In the quest to decode the inner workings of
neural architectures, their inspection has long relied on electrical recordings [4, 5]. While in vivo electrophysiology,
instrumental in neuroscience, uniquely allows for sampling neural activities associated with specific behaviors [6, 7],
its interpretation is challenged by whole-organism complexity. In vitro systems, including single cells, small networks,
or tissue samples of larger-scale connectivity, in contrast represent a reduced –yet complementary– route to expose
neural interactions across scales [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. From the perspective of synthesizing fundamental principles
of biological computing, there are significant opportunities with deploying electrical interfaces in vitro, particularly
in conjunction with engineered neural substrates [11, 12, 13, 14]. Indeed, by spatially distributing and connecting
biological units (neural populations) of prescribed size, geometry or neuron-type onto input/output electronic
platforms, living processing architectures may be realized, operated and tested [15, 16, 17, 18, 19], potentially
enabling a new class of computing systems, with ramifications in engineering, biology and healthcare.
In this context, Micro-Electrode Arrays (MEAs) technology, where electrodes of variable size, density and spatial
arrangement are patterned on biocompatible surfaces, represents a powerful and mature option to interface with
cellular systems, and has been employed from single neurons electrophysiology [20] to high-throughput pharmaceutical
screens [21, 22]. However, the potential of MEA systems remains hindered by design, fabrication, integration and
software management complexities. Labs have indeed little choice but to invest in commercial solutions [23, 24],
which are proprietary, specialize to support biomedical research, afford minimal-to-no customization, and remain
costly, limiting adoption (from tens of thousands of dollars for a standard 60-electrode system to hundreds of
thousands for more advanced configurations). This has led to a recent interest in the open-source development
of MEA platforms [25, 26], aimed at lowering barriers to entry while catering to needs such as multi-well drug
testing [27], enhanced optical access [28, 29], or chronic tissue monitoring [26]. However, a comprehensive, accessible
solution to flexibly and multimodally interact with a variety of neural substrates, from organotypic brain slices to
engineered 3D tissue, remains to be demonstrated.
Here, prompted by the untapped potential of in vitro neural systems for computing, we present an interfacing
platform that is versatile, scalable, reconfigurable and portable, that can be easily fabricated, robustly operated
across cellular contexts, and broadly disseminated. We term this technology ‘Mind in Vitro’ (MiV), to emphasize
the information processing motivation. Our platform hosts high-density MEA chips, manufactured in standard
cleanroom facilities via maskless photolithography, and varying in size, spatial topology and transparency depending
on the application. These chips are matched to swappable, custom printed circuit boards (PCBs) relaying neural
signals to Open Ephys [30] or Intan acquisition terminals [31] for signal acquisition and subsequent downstream
processing. Our system seamlessly integrates with both electrical and optical stimulation modules, as well as other
add-ons such as fluidic interfaces or tissue-specific positioning apparatuses. Reconfigurability is further leveraged to
comply with industrial standards and integrate with common microscopic chambers, enabling concurrent imaging.
Such flexibility allows for the combination of high-temporal (electric) and high-spatial (imaging) resolutions, seizing
on the opportunities afforded by ever-expanding genetic optical markers used in neuroscience research [32, 33].
Additionally, an open-source software package is developed to manage the system and support operability, data
storage, analysis, and visualization. To increase usability, source code is based on Python language and native
interfaces with external neurophysiology (NeuralEnsemble [34]) and machine learning (scikit-learn [35]) software
suites are provided.
Our integrated systems are demonstrated across a broad range of in vitro settings, from 2D cultures of embryonic
stem cell-derived neurons and dissociated hippocampal cells to organotypic brain slices and 3D engineered neural
tissue mimics. Multiple applications are illustrated including electrical, optical and fluidic manipulation, concurrent
calcium imaging, and long-term recording (>24h). By logging over 1000 hours of experiments and tens of TB of data
across distinct labs, robustness and portability are further showcased. By open-sourcing all design files, preparation
protocols, documentation and software, a useful, accessible, and self-contained neural interfacing solution is then
delivered, catering to the expanding needs of both traditional and non-traditional in vitro applications.
2 Platform overview
Here, a system-level overview of our hardware and software is provided (Fig. 1). We start by describing the recording
platform, its basic configurations and extensions. We then discuss its deployment in the lab and managing software.