(a)
Open Ephys Acq. Board

SPI cable
Intan
headstages

bottom layer bumper

top layer

PCB
interface
pogo pins
MEA

stopper

extened pogo pins

hinge
latch

Design

PCB options
59 128 256 512

data loading
signal recorder

data
processing
filtering
spike detection
spike cutouts
raster visualization
statistical analysis

advanced
network
characterization

channel-wise
causality & coherence
burst analysis
information theory
shannon entropy
block entropy
transfer entropy

fluidic
inlets

4-well
MEA

optical stimulation
optical electrical

headstage (c) workstation

mini-incubator tower

optical stimulation modules

platform inventory data acquisition &
electrical stimulation
controllers

incubator
Open Ephys GUI

correlation

cloud
storage HPC

stimulation

stimulation

Recording / Stimulation Platform
(b)

MiV-Open Software
(e)

short-term recording
long-term recording

(d)Lab Deployment

(stimulation / ext. grounding)

Figure 1: System overview. (a) CAD illustration of our recording platform, assembled from low-cost materials and commercially available
parts. The platform is designed to be compatible with a series of PCB options across a variety of different recording capacities. The full list
of components used to construct the hardware system can be found in the SI. (b) Assembled 128-channel recording platform. (c) Stimulation
setup. Electrical stimulation can be performed by connecting a pulse generator (e.g. Stimjim) to extended pogo pins through a direct connection.
Alternatively, for finer control, the Open Ephys terminal can be replaced with an Intan terminal, enabling bidirectional recording/stimulation across
up to 128 channels. Optical stimulation is achieved by placing optical fibers on either side of the MEA. (d) Lab deployment of the recording system.
Recordings are performed inside an incubator, while the data acquisition board and various external modules are set outside of the incubation
environment. (e) Overview of the customized software package for data analysis, including an interface module for loading continuous or binary data
recorded using the Open Ephys GUI, along with a variety of commonly utilized functions relevant for data processing and network characterization.
Finally, we compare our design with existing alternatives.
Recording platform. Central to our system is a platform that hosts MEA-chips and PCB interfaces to form a
complete signal chain, from neural substrates to data acquisition terminal and downstream processing (Fig. 1a).