The platform consists of two layers of laser-cut acrylic board that are connected by a plastic hinge and can be
locked in-place through a latch. This design eases loading and unloading of the chips and allows for rapid changes
in recording configurations. The bottom layer also accommodates four sliding guides and 3D-printed stoppers, to
conveniently center and hold chips of different sizes and shapes. Underneath the bottom layer, four soft rubber
bumpers are affixed to insulate the platform against vibrations, minimizing recording noise. Secured to the top
acrylic layer, a PCB provides the signal interface between the MEA chip and the Open Ephys data acquisition
terminal. To ensure a firm, yet compliant contact with the MEA, arrays of spring-loaded contact (pogo) pins are
soldered to the bottom of the PCB. Upon loading a chip, the top layer is closed and locked with the pins gently
making contact with metal pads patterned on the perimeter of the MEA. These pads, and the electronic tracks
emanating from them, are designed to connect one-to-one with micro-electrodes located at the center of the chip,
where neural substrates are plated and incubated. Signals sampled at 30kHz at each electrode are then transferred
through these tracks, pogo pins and PCB before being received and processed by amplifier headstages located on the
rear edge of the PCB. Intan Technologies headstages, connected to Open Ephys terminals through serial peripheral
interface (SPI) cables, are utilized here because of their wide compatibility.
Supported recording capacities. With versatility in mind, our system supports a range of recording capacities
and configurations. The Open Ephys board allows the connection of up to 4 SPI cables, each capable of handling
up to 128 digital data streams, setting the maximum capacity to 512 recording channels. This translates into
high-density chips of 512 microelectrodes. Practically, in certain contexts, it may be desirable to employ fewer
recording channels. Indeed, fewer channels imply fewer headstages (significantly reducing costs), simpler MEAs and
PCB designs, as well as less computationally intensive data processing and analysis. Our system then provides
built-in modularity to mix-and-match Intan headstages of variable capacity (32, 64, 128 channels), through a series
of swappable PCB options supporting 59 (compatible with the widely used Multichannel system 60MEA series), 128,
256 and 512 recording channels. An example of 128-channel recording system, employing two 64-channel headstages,
is illustrated in Fig. 1b. Assembly details for each standard are found in the SI.
Extension to electrical and optical stimulation. Our system supports both electrical and optical neural simulation
to enable multimodal inputs to the neural tissue. Through extended pogo pins on the PCB (Fig. 1a), designated
electrodes can be directly connected with an external electric source for stimulation. This allows the utilization
of low-cost stimulators, such as Stimjim [36] (Fig. 1c). Alternatively, if a large number of stimulation channels
is desired for fine spatial control, a bidirectional Intan controller can be connected to the platform’s headstages,
enabling the simultaneous stimulation of up to 128 channels (details in SI). Another powerful, widely adopted
modality of neural interaction is optical stimulation. At the cellular level, the expression of light sensitivity to
specific wavelengths is achieved via channelrhodopsin transfection [37]. Here, we employ 465nm LED and lasers
from Doric Lenses connected to optic fibers to locally stimulate transfected neural populations. To this end, our
platform is designed to be top and bottom accessible, with openings on both acrylic layers, allowing optical fibers
to be placed underneath or above the MEA-chip (Fig. 1c). This design allows to flexibly combine recording, and
electrical/optical stimulation, either concurrently or serially, to achieve the desired input/output protocol.
Deployment in the lab. The platform deployment is presented in Fig.1d, illustrating its integration with
a workstation, multiple data acquisition/stimulation controllers, optical/electrical stimulators, and incubators
of different dimensions and specifications, all fitting within the space of a standard benchtop. With the largest
dimension below 150mm, the recording platform, upon sanitization, can be easily placed and operated across
incubators. Apart from providing the necessary environment for maintaining neural cultures, incubators also serve
as noise canceling Faraday cages that minimize interference, thanks to their conductive inner surfaces. Assembled
from inexpensive materials, the recording platform can be conveniently duplicated to allow parallel recordings.
Short-term experiments (<2 hours), during which culture media evaporation and pH change are not a major concern
(at least in the case of dissociated cell cultures), are performed in a mini-incubator tower stack. Maintaining only
temperature, these incubators are low-cost, portable, and have simple chambers that can be easily reconfigured and
sanitized. Several demonstrations of Section 4 have been carried out in this environment. For long-term recordings
(>24 hours) instead, more capable incubators for the control of temperature, pH, and humidity are necessary. The
required high-humidity levels, in particular, pose a significant challenge for electronics, leading to rapid oxidation
and signal degradation. This is one of the reasons why long-term in vitro electrophysiology remains uncommon,
given the investment associated with commercial setups. In our case, the separation between data acquisition
terminal and on-site signal amplification, combined with the use of inexpensive components, reduces the liability
of operating our platform in incubator atmospheres for extensive periods of time, minimizing financial losses in
the event of electronics failure. A 24-hour experiment with no appreciable hardware degradation is reported in
Section 4.