3 MEA-chip microfabrication, design and characterization
In keeping with an approach centered on versatility, here we focus on the realization of custom MEA-chips. We
adopt a microfabrication process based on maskless photolithography. This technique enables the direct patterning
of any 2D topology imported from CAD files, bypassing the need of dedicated photomasks for each design. Chips
can then be customized without additional manufacturing steps, reducing fabrication time and cost. Further, this
protocol allows significant flexibility in terms of constitutive materials, which we demonstrate and leverage to
manufacture transparent MEAs for optical applications, as described in Section 4.3.
Microfabrication. An overview of the adopted fabrication process is illustrated in Fig. 3a, while detailed
information about tools and settings is provided in Material and Methods and SI. We start by spin-coating a thin
layer of photoresist (PR) onto a clean borosilicate glass wafer. Glass is selected as substrate material because of its
transparency, chemical stability, and strength. We employ the Heidelberg MLA 150 Maskless Aligner to pattern
custom MEA designs on the PR layer via a direct-writing laser source. The processed wafer is then submerged in
developer solution to dissolve the exposed PR and reveal the MEA topology. Next, constitutive materials of the
MEA are uniformly deposited on the developed wafer through sputtering. Most of the MEAs employed in this
study consist of two metal layers of titanium (Ti) and platinum (Pt), with a total thickness of 100nm. Here, Pt
serves as the main constitutive material because of its good conductivity and relative ease to obtain and utilize,
while the Ti layer is used for enhancing adhesion between Pt and wafer. An alternative process is also discussed in
Section 4.3 for the deposition of thin films of indium tin oxide (ITO), which has been previously demonstrated
in fully transparent MEAs [29]. Subsequent to the sputtering process, materials outside of the MEA pattern are
lifted-off through sonication in acetone.
Next, we apply the passivation layer that encapsulates the entire MEA, with the exception of the electrodes and
contact pads. To do this, the wafer is first deposited with a 500nm thick layer of silicon nitride (Si3N4), through
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). Then, a second photolithography process is performed,
creating a patterned PR layer on top of the Si3N4, with openings at the electrode and contact pad locations. The
exposed Si3N4 is then removed by reactive-ion etching, using the PR layer as a mask. The PR layer is subsequently
stripped using acetone. The overall result is a chip in which electrodes and contact pads are exposed for recording
and stimulation while connecting wires are insulated. Finally, the wafer is diced into chips of desired shapes.
Design. In Fig. 3b,c we demonstrate the versatility of the above approach through the realization of a variety
of MEA designs. Figure 3b illustrates a series of 30μm-electrode chips of increasing resolution spanning 59 to 512
channels arranged in regular rectangular patterns. Each of these MEAs presents a contact pad layout compatible
with one of the PCB interfaces of Fig. 1a, synergistically enabling the rapid reconfiguration of the platform. Besides
the number of electrodes, the chip layout can be modified as well. Figure 3c illustrates three designs, of which
the first two have not been previously reported (either commercially or through customization): a curved MEA
arrangement optimized to conform to the natural morphology of the mouse cortex [47], and a perturbed layout in
which electrodes are randomly displaced around uniform grid locations, to reduce subsampling and aliasing in the
analysis of neuronal avalanches [9], as theoretically predicted in [48]. The third example implements a multi-well
topology, allowing to host and monitor four independent cultures at once for parallel testing. The use of several of
these layouts is demonstrated in the Results section.
Characterization. Prior to deployment for cell seeding, electrical properties of the chip array are characterized,
and their impedance is reduced through platinum black deposition. This is a commonly employed electroplating
technique for which platinum in chloroplatinic acid solution forms granular structures that adhere to the electrodes,
upon current application [49, 50] (Fig. 3d, further details in Section 6.1). The process increases the electrodes’
effective surface area, lowering impedance and thus improving the capability of detecting neuronal signals.
In order to gain operational insight, we characterize the dependence between impedance and electrode size. We
employ a specially designed chip (again leveraging the versatility of our fabrication approach) in which electrodes
of four distinct diameters (5, 10, 20 and 30μm) are patterned in separate quadrants (SI). Figure 3e shows that,
while impedance is generally larger for smaller electrodes (as expected), in all cases the use of platinum deposition
leads to reductions of at least one order of magnitude, yielding values below the neural signal detection threshold of
< 1MΩ. This implies that all of these electrode sizes are viable, an additional asset relevant in specific applications.
We also explore how impedance decreases relative to deposition time (Fig. 3f). Our results suggest that longer
deposition time (of up to 100s) is needed for smaller electrodes (5-10μm) to achieve the ideal value of ∼200kΩ [51].
Finally, we quantify the phase of the impedance (which is a complex variable) to confirm its negative value, that is
to confirm the capacitive property of our electrodes. As can be seen in Fig. 3g, this is demonstrated across all cases,