rendering our chips well-suited for electrophysiology.
4 Results
Through a variety of 2D and 3D neural systems derived from a broad number of sources, we illustrate the
functionalities of our hardware and software both on-site and off-site, involving multi-modal stimulation, concurrent
imaging and fluidic support. All demonstrations entail the use of a 128-channel platform configuration, selected
because of its exact compatibility with both Open Ephys and Intan bidirectional modules. However, results relative
to our other configurations can be found in the SI.
4.1 2D neural systems
We first test our interface via 2D cultures from both mouse embryonic stem cell-derived motor neurons (ESC-MNs) and
dissociated mouse primary neurons (PNs). These cultures are prepared following different dissociation/differentiation
protocols but share a conserved seeding procedure. Seeding is directly performed on MEAs that are surface treated
to enhance cell attachment (protocols details in Section 6.2). Throughout, ESC-MNs represent our main cell line,
as it endogenously expresses Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) enabling optical stimulation [53], and because it can be
differentiated into motor neurons that co-express enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP). This conveniently
allows us to monitor culture conditions during preparation and maturation. Further, recorded data can be more
easily interpreted with the aid of fluorescent microscopy. Results in this section are then shown for ESC-MNs,
however, a parallel study with PN cultures (without GFP or optogenetic stimulation) is reported in the SI.
We seed ESC-MNs on two 128-channel MEAs, realized with either 30μm or 5μm electrode diameters (Fig. 4a),
and begin recording spontaneous neural activity 7 days after seeding. Each recording consists of 2 minutes of
data and is repeated every other day, at the same time, for 20 consecutive days. Raw neural signals are recorded
using Open Ephys and are then processed offline through our software, for filtering and spike detection. The
spike raster of Fig. 4b showcases spontaneous neural activity from the 30μm MEA, where single unit activity is
plotted across channels. The use of high-density MEAs helps reveal intrinsic network properties, reflected here in
highly synchronized population bursts, which would not be detectable at the single site level (e.g., patch clamp
electrophysiology). Waveforms from all recording channels are sorted using PCA to isolate signal fingerprints
matching characteristic neuron spike shapes (cutouts of Fig. 4b). The performance stability of our system is
illustrated by plotting daily average spiking rates across all channels over 4 weeks, where a typical in vitro neuron
maturation-degradation curve is observed. As can be seen in Fig. 4c, for MEAs of both electrode sizes, average
spiking rates first increase during network maturation, to then plateau and gradually decrease as cells begin to age.
We also quantify the quality of our recording setup by determining the mean signal to noise ratio (SNR) across
channels. As seen in Fig. 4d, spiking channels (95% of channels for 30μm MEA and 70% for 5μm MEA) consistently
exhibit an SNR>5 after filtering, on-par with reported performance of commercially available devices [54].
On top of spontaneous activity recording, we consider simultaneous multi-modal stimulation. While this is a
useful paradigm in neuroscience for studying synaptic potentiation [55], it is also a pre-requisite to encode inputs
for potential computing applications. As an example of electrical stimulation, we consider a single-well MEA seeded
with ESC-MNs, and apply brief, biphasic electric pulses (Stimjim [36]) at a designated location. The heat-maps of
Fig. 4e show the effect of such stimulations, visualizing the average neural firing recorded by each microelectrode.
We find that within our cultures, firing rates of neurons surrounding the stimulation site are enhanced, with levels
of activation proportional to the intensity of the stimulus.
We proceed by pairing optical stimulation with a 4-well chip design, to illustrate a parallel environment for
control and selective stimulation experiments. To this end, ESC-MNs are seeded into four independent clusters on
the MEA of Fig. 4f. Spontaneous activity is first recorded and processed to compute network correlations within
wells and across wells. We see that recordings within the same cluster show high correlation scores. We then
selectively apply optical stimulation to one well (#3), obtaining a highly synchronized response compared to the
other wells.
Finally, we consider long-term electrophysiology applications. Complementary to short-term recordings that
reveal transient and fast neural responses, longer recordings are necessary for investigating prolonged and slow
plastic behaviors, such as facilitation, habituation, and long-term potentiation. However, as underscored in Section 2,
performing long-term recordings inside a high-humidity environment challenges the recording system with accelerated
electronic degradation. We reduce liability via a modular design for which most of the delicate electronics are kept