TITLE. “Role of a Pdlim5:PalmD complex in directing dendrite morphology.” Version: 08-30-2023
AUTHORS.
Yogesh Srivastava1,

*, Maxsam Donta1,2, Lydia L. Mireles3

, Adriana Paulucci-Holthauzen1

, M. Neal Waxham3,4,

* Pierre D.

McCrea1,2,4,*
1
Department of Genetics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston TX 77030 2
Program in Genetics & Epigenetics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center UT Health GSBS, Houston TX 77030
3
Department of Neurobiology & Anatomy, UTHealth, Houston TX 77030 4
Program in Neuroscience, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center UT Health GSBS, Houston TX 77030
* Co-corresponding authors:
Pierre D McCrea PhD, pdmccrea@mdanderson.org
Yogesh Srivastava PhD, ysrivastava@mdanderson.org
M Neal Waxham PhD, M.N.Waxham@uth.tmc.edu
SUMMARY.
Neuronal connectivity is regulated during normal brain development with the arrangement of spines and synapses being
dependent on the morphology of dendrites. Further, in multiple neurodevelopmental and aging disorders, disruptions of
dendrite formation or shaping is associated with atypical neuronal connectivity. We showed previously that Pdlim5
binds delta-catenin and promotes dendrite branching (Baumert et al., J Cell Biol 2020). We report here that Pdlim5
interacts with PalmD, a protein previously suggested by others to interact with the cytoskeleton (e.g., via adducin/
spectrin) and to regulate membrane shaping. Functionally, the knockdown of PalmD or Pdlim5 in rat primary
hippocampal neurons dramatically reduces branching and conversely, PalmD exogenous expression promotes dendrite
branching as does Pdlim5. Further, we show that each proteins’ effects are dependent on the presence of the other. In
summary, using primary rat hippocampal neurons we reveal the contributions of a novel Pdlim5:PalmD protein complex,
composed of functionally inter-dependent components responsible for shaping neuronal dendrites.
KEYWORDS.
Neuron; Dendrite; Shape; Morphology; Cytoskeleton; Catenin.
INTRODUCTION.
The shaping of dendrites enables the formation of elaborate dendritic arbors required in constructing neuronal
networks 1,2. Further, in multiple pathological contexts, the gross morphology of dendrites is altered in ways that
degrade nervous system functions. Such losses come about since neuronal activity, signaling, and plasticity each require
organized synaptic connections that are dependent upon the morphology of dendrites.
Constituting a gap in knowledge, less is known about the mechanisms regulating dendritic branching or lengthening
relative to the wealth of studies addressing axon trajectories 3,4, or the formation of dendritic spines or pre- or
postsynaptic densities 5,6. In the context of neuronal dendritic branching, we recently reported that Pdlim5 (as well as
Magi1) interact with delta-catenin in a phosphorylation-dependent manner and regulate dendritic branching 7
. The
mouse knockout of Pdlim5 is embryonic lethal 8 and Pdlim5’s structure and presence is largely conserved across
vertebrate animals (Supplemental Figure 1A) (e.g., ~89% identity between human and rat). Dysregulation of Pdlim5 is
proposed to factor into atypical dendritic tree morphology and synaptic connectivity in human neurodevelopmental
diseases including schizophrenia, depression, and bipolar disorder 8-13 consistent with our in vitro studies identifying a
regulatory role for Pdlim5 in dendrite morphology 7
.

Pdlim5 is composed of an N-terminal PDZ-domain (PSD-95, Dlg, and ZO-1), central DUF-domain (“Domain of Unknown
Function”), and a triad of C-terminal LIM-repeats (LIM domain) (Figure 1B) 14,15. Pdlim5 is present in dendrites and other
neuronal structures, with its subcellular distribution varying somewhat across developmental stages 7,16. Pdlim5 is

reported to associate with alpha-actinin and PKCepsilon and to be required in phorbol ester induced dendritic growth-
cone collapse, restricting dendrite outgrowth in that context 15,16. By having an inhibitory effect upon Rac to displace

Arp2/3 from the leading edge, Pdlim5 also limits AMPK-stimulated cell migration in C2C12 cells via restriction of