minutes. Proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE Whatman) using a Pierce Power Blotter
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). Membranes were blocked in TBS supplemented with 0.1% Tween-20 plus 1% dry milk, with
incubation for 4-to-12 hours at 4°C. Blocked membranes were incubated in primary antibodies overnight at 4°C before
being incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen) for 1-to-2 hours at room temperature. Lastly,
membranes were incubated with Pierce ECL immuno-blotting substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific # 32106) and imaged
using a ChemiDoc MP imaging system (Bio-Rad).
Immunofluorescence staining and Confocal microscopy
Immunostaining of rat primary hippocampal neurons or HT-22 cells employed established protocols (Baumert at al.,
2020; Lee et al., 2014). Briefly, cells cultured on poly-D-lysine-coated coverslips were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
for 10 minutes at room temperature and then permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 solution for 15 min. Following
fixation and permeabilization, cells were blocked with PBS containing 1% bovine serum albumin overnight at 4°C. Cells
were then incubated with the indicated primary antibodies overnight at 4°C and subsequently rinsed three times with
fresh PBS for 10 min each, followed by an overnight rinse with PBS at 4°C. Cells were then incubated with Alexa Fluor
fluorescent dye-conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen) for 1 hour at room temperature before the coverslips
were washed and finally mounted onto glass slides with Vectashield (Vector Laboratories) mounting solution. Cells were
visualized using a Nikon T2i Inverted Confocal Microscope with an Apo-Plan 60× 1.4 NA oil objective at room

temperature. Images were captured with a Nikon A1-DUG GaAsP hybrid four-channel multi-detector and Nikon NIS-
Elements software. All z-series images were acquired at a pixel size of 100 nm and a step size of 0.2 μm.

Neuronal morphological analysis by IMARIS9.9
Rat primary hippocampal neurons underwent assessment of their morphological characteristics with a focus upon
neurites/ dendrites. z-Series images of immunofluorescently stained neurons were captured using a Nikon T2i Inverted
Confocal Microscope, as previously mentioned. Prior to analysis, IMARIS 9.9 was utilized to generate a 2-dimensional
maximum-projection image with background subtraction from the confocal z-series of each neuron. In cases where
dendrite number was evaluated, counting focused upon the number of dendrite tips per neuron, excluding any
protrusions shorter than 5 μm. Dendritic length was measured by tracing from the cell body to the tip of the dendrite
using IMARIS 9.9 filament tracer. Thresholds and settings for IMARIS 9.9 filament tracer were kept the same for all samples. For
Sholl analysis, the maximum-projection images were converted to binary and analyzed in IMARIS 9.9 filament tracer
using concentric rings with a 5 μm step size to evaluate dendrite morphology in relation to the distance from the cell
body 44.
Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism. Statistical significance for Sholl data were determined using a two-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc analysis (figure 1D, 4C, 4E and S4E). For all other comparisons, a one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s test was used (Figure S1B, S1D, 2B, 2D, 2E, 3B, 3D, S4B, S4C and S4D). Data distribution was assumed to be
normal, but this was not formally tested. Significance was assigned at P < 0.05. Please refer to each Legend for specific
information related to experimental statistical considerations.