SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE TITLES & LEGENDS.
Supplemental Figure 1. Pdlim5 conservation and function
A. The conservation of Pdlim5 among various vertebrates is depicted in the figure. Conserved sequences
are represented in red, while identical sequences are shown in gray. Gaps in the alignment are denoted
by red lines. The number of amino acids for each species is indicated in the top right corner, and the
species names are listed on the left side. The multiple sequence alignment was conducted using Clustal
Omega software.
B. Impact of Pdlim5 knockdown (siRNA992, siRNA993) on hippocampal neuron branching morphology.
Exogenous expression of GFP (control), Pdlim5, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of Pdlim5. Following
siRNA-mediated knockdown of Pdlim5 (siRNA992, siRNA993), we observed a significant reduction in
dendritic complexity. In contrast, the exogenous expression of Pdlim5 resulted in an increase in
branching morphology in comparison to negative control GFP. n=10 neurons each from three biological
replicates.
C. Illustrative images demonstrating the knockdown (KD) of Pdlim5. The control GFP image (green, first
image on the left) exhibits less branching compared to the expression of exogenous Pdlim5 (green,
second image from the left), while loss of branching morphology is observed in the Pdlim5 knockdown
siRNA images (green, third and fourth images from the left). Neuron health was assessed using the
Map2 marker. n = 3 biological replicates. The scale bars in the images indicate 20 μm. See panel D for
quantitation.
D. The Pdlim5 total cell fluorescence was quantified using ImageJ for negative control (GFP), positive
control Pdlim5, and siRNA mediated knockdown of Pdlim5 (siRNA992, siRNA993). As expected in
comparison to control, exogenous Pdlim5 significantly increases Pdlim5 total cell fluorescence while
knockdown significantly decreases Pdlim5 total cell fluorescence. n≥10 neurons in each of three
biological replicates. The quartiles represent data ranges and middle dark line represent median, and
the statistical significance, determined using one-way ANOVA, is indicated as P ≤ 0.0001 (****).
Supplemental Figure 2. Selected Pdlim5 associated candidates with known cytoskeletal functions
Our yeast-2-hybrid (Y2H) screen suggested several Pdlim5-associated candidates involved in cytoskeletal
functions. In total we resolved over 70 candidates with 11 being implicated in cytoskeletal contexts,
including for example Beta-III Spectrin, Beta-IV Spectrin, and alpha-Actinin4. Our studies here focused
upon PalmD for reasons outlined in the text.
Supplemental Figure 3. PalmD, a novel partner of Pdlim5, associates with Pdlim5’s LIM domain
A. The endogenous co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of Pdlim5 and PalmD was performed from rat
primary cortical neurons at DIV9. Blots were used to demonstrate the pull-downs of Pdlim5 and PalmD.
Separate blots for endogenous PalmD and Pdlim5 were undertaken given their similar molecular
weights (~70kDa). Endogenous self-IP blots were also performed, confirming the effectiveness of the
endogenous IP procedures. n≥3 biological replicates for each condition.

B. In exogenous contexts (HEK293 cells), we engineered Pdlim5 with a 6x-Myc-epitope tag (MT) at its N-
terminus (~75kD), while PalmD was fused with GFP (~100kD). Together with the findings noted in

Figures 2 and 3, and immediately above in Panel A, we collectively provide evidence of both endogenous
and exogenous association between Pdlim5 and PalmD. n≥3 biological replicates in each condition.