C. PalmD co-immunoprecipitation with Pdlim5’s isolated LIM domain. PalmD was co-expressed with
each individually isolated domains of Pdlim5 (LIM or PDZ). The results revealed that PalmD associates
specifically with the LIM domain of Pdlim5. Relative to negative controls, no association was observed
with the other isolated domains, such as PDZ (or with the central DUF domain; not shown). n≥3
biological replicates in each condition. See also below Panel D.
D. In addition to using co-IP (see panel C above), we applied an orthogonal method we term GLS (see
the text and Methods), to explore the association of different domains of Pdlim5 with PalmD. The assay
revealed the colocalizations of PalmD with Pdlim5 at the Golgi only when the LIM domain of Pdlim5 was
present. This finding again suggests that PalmD has an association with the LIM domain of Pdlim5. n≥3
biological replicates.
Supplemental Figure 4. Function and functional dependency of Pdlim5: PalmD complex
A. Imaris-generated 3D rendering image of rat primary hippocampal neurons shows the exogenous
expression of negative control GFP, Pdlim5, or PalmD. Increased branching is observed in neurons
expressing Pdlim5 or PalmD compared to the GFP control. Panel B provides quantitation of the average
number of tips per cell. n≥3 biological replicates.
B. Imaris 9.9.0 and Image J software was utilized to quantify the average number of tips per cell. A box
and violin plot illustrates significantly increased branching upon Pdlim5 or PalmD exogenous expression.
Each dot represents a single neuron (n=10), and the levels of statistical significance, determined using
one-way ANOVA, are indicated as P ≤ 0.0001 (****). n≥10 neurons.
C. A bar graph compares negative-control GFP, exogenous PalmD expression, and knockdown of PalmD
(siRNA-714; siRNA-716) based on Imaris 9.9 tool analysis (see Methods). The analysis reveals that PalmD
acts as a modulator for branching function. The loss of PalmD is associated with a decrease in branching
morphology, while exogenous expression of PalmD enhances branching. Each dot represents a single
neuron (n=10), and the levels of statistical significance, determined using one-way ANOVA, are indicated
as P ≤ 0.0001 (****), n≥10 neurons each from three biological replicates.
D. Correlated total cell fluorescence was quantified using Image J software, indicating that knockdown
of PalmD significantly reduces fluorescence intensity compared to the negative-control GFP or to
positive-control PalmD-overexpressing neurons. n≥10 neurons in each of three biological replicates.
Each dot represents a single neuron, and The violin plot quartiles represent data ranges and middle dark
line represent median, and the statistical significance, determined using one-way ANOVA, is indicated as
P ≤ 0.0001 (****).
E. Sholl analysis was performed to analyze dendrite morphology in neurons under different conditions:
GFP control, exogenous PalmD expression, and exogenous PalmD expression in the presence of
knockdown of Pdlim5 (siRNA-992). Neurons overexpressing PalmD exhibit a significant increase in
dendritic complexity compared to GFP-expressing cells. However, when Pdlim5 siRNA-992 is introduced
alongside PalmD exogenous expression, there is a significant loss of branching function. n≥15 neurons in
each of three biological replicates. The significance was assessed using a two-way ANOVA with
Bonferroni post-hoc analysis. The levels of significance varied from P ≤ 0.0001 to P ≤ 0.05, depending on
the radial distance from the soma.,
F. Representative binary images (see Methods) indicate the interdependency of Pdlim5's and PalmD's
branching functions. In the absence of Pdlim5, PalmD no longer enhances branching morphology.