lamellipodia formation 17. In excitatory pyramidal hippocampal neurons, Pdlim5 inhibits formation of dendritic spines
(via the inhibition of SPAR) 14. In relation to gene activity, Pdlim5 affects neuron differentiation through cytoplasmic
sequestration of the Id2 transcriptional regulator 18. In summary, Pdlim5 exhibits context-dependent positive and
negative roles in dendrites, with Pdlim5 expression increasing dendritic arbor complexity as we have reported 7
.
Here, we reveal that Pdlim5 engages with a key partner protein, PalmD, in dendrite shaping. PalmD is of interest since it
appears to be involved in membrane protrusion 19,20 necessary to initiate dendrite branching. PalmD is also found to
associate with adducin 20, a component of the spectrin-actin cytoskeleton that in turn acts in multiple cellular functions
21,22. Importantly, as demonstrated in this report, PalmD robustly passed our validation tests for association with Pdlim5,
and it has attributes supporting a functional Pdlim5:PalmD relationship in dendrite branching.

RESULTS.
Pdlim5 is a positive regulator of dendritic branching.
In our studies, we have employed mixed cultures of primary rat primary hippocampal neurons in vitro. This selection
was made given their faithful reflection of key morphogenic properties found in vivo, while at the same time offering
facile manipulation for mechanistic and phenotypic tests. As outlined in Methods, we generally introduce control or
experimental constructs into the cultured neurons at DIV1-3 (days in vitro 1-3) and fix at DIV5-7. Here, we assayed for
endogenous protein expression as shown for Pdlim5 across DIV1-9. In unperturbed cells Pdlim5 is primarily evident in
soma and neurites. It thus appears that in common with PalmD (see below Figure 2), Pdlim5 is available to make
potentially-varied contributions across a series of neuronal developmental phases (e.g., from neurite through dendritic
stages that are inclusive of initial through advanced branching events and synapse formation) (Figure 1A; see also Figure
2). Further, Pdlim5 and PalmD continue to be expressed in the adult CNS (www.proteinatlas.org). To form a baseline for
subsequent phenotypic comparisons, we first built on our earlier findings demonstrating that the exogenous expression
of Pdlim5 promotes the branching of rat primary hippocampal dendrites (Figure 1C&D) 7

. We complemented the
exogenous expression phenotypes by conducting Pdlim5 knock-downs. Each of two independent siRNAs efficiently
depleted Pdlim5 (Supplemental Figure 1C&D). Further, each siRNA severely reduced branching as seen in representative
immunofluorescent images and as quantified by Sholl analysis (Figure 1C&D). Our findings here are entirely consistent
with our prior work 7 showing that Pdlim5 has a functional role in dendritic branching.
PalmD associates with Pdlim5, likely directly.
To glean insight into candidate partners of Pdlim5, we undertook yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screens of a mouse brain
library (Hybrigenics, Inc.). Y2H screens of a chosen “bait” (e.g., Pdlim5) often provide initial clues pointing to direct
interactions with “prey” proteins, and ours pointed to PalmD in the company of additional candidates (Supplemental
Figure 2). Our interest focused on PalmD from the fact that little is known of its mechanisms of action, yet it has
proposed roles in membrane protrusion, an early step in dendrite branching. Further, PalmD is thought to bind (via
adducin) to the spectrin-actin cytoskeleton, a significant player in the shaping and functions of neurons 20-24. While not
pursued here, we note that also arising from our Y2H findings was alpha-actinin4, an established crosslinker of actin
microfilaments 25,26 that was independently reported to associate with Pdlim5 15,16.
First, we looked at the relative degree of immunofluorescence colocalization of endogenous Pdlim5 and PalmD in rat
primary hippocampal neurons (Figure 2A&B). Given that each neuron will go on to bear only one axon, we can assume
that we primarily scored neurites destined to become dendritic processes. In DIV4 neurons, colocalization of Pdlim5 and
PalmD was evaluated via immunocytochemistry, quantified by employing Mean Pearson’s Coefficient. Values greater
than zero are associated with positive correlations. In line with our expectation that Pdlim5 and PalmD form both paired
and distinct complexes within cells, our findings are consistent with a significant but not complete overlap of their
endogenous localizations.
We next quantitated the relative distributions of Pdlim5 and PalmD in the soma (cellular region immediately
surrounding the nucleus), dendritic processes, and nuclei of DIV1&5 rat primary hippocampal neurons (Figure 2E). Given
significant areas of co-presence, our findings were consistent with the possibility that these two proteins might form
complexes within intracellular neuronal regions undergoing morphological differentiation. However, there remained the
need to turn to additional assays for more definitive assessments of direct binding.