In this regard, we applied an approach that is familiar to us, proximity ligation assay (PLA) 7

. PLA points to very close

protein:protein interactions (<30-40nm) 7

. In common with our inital Y2H screen, PLA supported the liklihood of a direct
Pdlim5:PalmD interaction relative to our negative and positive controls (Figure 2C&D). For example, the Pdlim5:PalmD
signals (puncta) observed were comparable in number and intensity to those resolved for our positive-control complex
of Pdlim5:delta-catenin 7 . Overall, our Y2H and PLA findings were supportive of the proposed Pdlim5:PalmD association.
PalmD associates with Pdlim5 based upon endogenous co-IPs, as well as ectopic Golgi co-relocalization assays.
We sought additional validations of the Pdlim5:PalmD association. For endogenous co-immunoprecipitations, we
employed rat primary cortical neurons given their relative abundance in comparison to hippocampal neurons. Indeed,
the immuno-precipitation of Pdlim5 produced a significant signal for associated PalmD (Figure 3A&B). The inverse co-IP
was similarly supportive (Supplemental Figure 3A). Because endogenous Pdlim5 and PalmD migrate via SDS-PAGE at
comparable positions, separate blots were used to resolve the co-IPs versus the self-IPs (Supplemental Figure 3A). We
additionally assayed co-IPs of exogenous epitope-tagged constructs expressed in HEK293 cells, and we again readily
resolved the Pdlim5:PalmD association (Supplemental Figure 3B). Our evidence suggests that the Pdlim5:PalmD
association may be quite stable, as we found the complex routinely survived even overnight incubations in cell lysis/
extraction buffer.
To apply a further test, we took an orthogonal approach that we earlier developed 7

. In it, one’s construct of interest is
ectopically directed to the outer Golgi membrane via fusion to a Golgi localization sequence (GLS). A putative partner is
then co-expressed, and we score for its ectopic co-targeting, versus not, to the Golgi (we assess if the partner “comes
along for the ride”). An attractive aspect of this method is that potential associations are happening in the cell cytoplasm
without biochemical treatment for lysis. Thus, the interactions are maintained in a more natural intra-cellular
environment. We resolved strong Pdlim5:PalmD colocalization to Golgi when Pdlim5 was ectopically localized there via
fusion to a GLS, but not when Pdlim5 lacked such a GLS (negative control) (Figure 3D). These experiments were
conducted in HT-22 cells (immortalized mouse hippocampal neuronal cell line), as we found them amenable to Golgi
visualization/ scoring. In summary, both our co-IP and GLS tests confirm Pdlim5:PalmD association (Figure 3), as
originally supported via yeast 2-hybrid (Y2H) and proximity ligation assays (PLA) (Figure 2).
We went on to apply the GLS methodology to map the region of Pdlim5 that binds to PalmD. Varied constructs of Pdlim5
were tested that retained or lacked each of Pdlim5’s three principal domains: PDZ, DUF, and LIM (Supplemental Figure
3). Our findings clearly indicated a primary role of Pdlim5’s C-terminal LIM domain in PalmD association, as opposed to
the N-terminal PDZ or central DUF domains (Supplemental Figure 3D). This result was further supported using traditional
co-IP strategies, where the LIM domain was found to co-IP with PalmD (Supplemental Figure 3C).
Functional assays support Pdlim5’s relationship with PalmD.
Analogous to what was earlier indicated in Figures 1A with regards to the developmental presence of Pdlim5 in rat
hippocampal neurons (DIV1-9), PalmD is readily observed in dendrites and soma (Figure 4A; see also Figure 2). Using
both exogenous expression and knock-down approaches we addressed the impact of manipulating the levels of PalmD
in rat primary hippocampal neurons. Upon its exogenous expression, we found that PalmD potently enhanced dendritic
branching as quantified via Sholl analysis, while conversely, PalmD knockdown using two independent siRNAs had the
opposing impact, dramatically reducing such branching (Figure 4B&C). Similar exogenous expression and knockdown
effects were observed when applying other measurements such as counting the number of dendritic tips or branch
points per primary hippocampal neuron, or when using Imaris-generated 3-D renderings or binary images for
visualizations. (Supplemental Figure 4). This suggested to us that the Pdlim5 and PalmD components within the
Pdlim5:PalmD complex are positive modulators of branching.
We next asked if the effects observed upon expressing Pdlim5 was dependent on the presence of PalmD, and vice versa.
When Pdlim5 was exogenously expressed under conditions of PalmD knockdown, we failed to observe any
enhancement of branching (Figure 4D&E). Indeed, as seen with the knockdown of PalmD-alone, we observed
suppression of branching relative to the GFP-alone control. We likewise observed that the promotion of dendrite
branching upon PalmD expression became suppressed upon the parallel knockdown of Pdlim5 (Supplemental Figure