4E&F). These findings are consistent with the existence of not only a biochemical Pdlim5:PalmD complex but also a
functional dependence between Pdlim5 and PalmD in the process of dendritic branching.

DISCUSSION.
The complexity of neuronal interconnections allowing for vertebrate central nervous system functions is impressive by
any standard, and there remains much to be learned about how dendrites are shaped to enable such interconnections.
Generally, neuronal networking requires the control of dendrite morphology because neuron:neuron interactions
depend upon the precise postsynaptic contacts of each dendrite’s associated synaptic spines. The postsynaptic
specializations of dendrites receive signals from the presynaptic terminals of axons that extend from nearby or distal
neurons. In this report, we focused upon the gross shaping of dendrites as opposed to the formation of precise synaptic
contacts, but these vastly different morphologic scales remain interrelated given that proper synapse patterning can
only come about when dendrites adopt morphologies consistent with spine/ synapse generation. There are numerous
extrinsic and intrinsic cellular factors that modulate neuronal branching. With regards to extrinsic cues, glutamate 27,28
and brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 29 are just two examples, along with varied transmembrane
ligand:receptor pairings inclusive of cell:cell adhesion molecules 30,31. Prominent intrinsic cellular factors include
examples like small-GTPases, cytoskeletal components or regulators (e.g., affecting organelle distribution and the extent
or polarity of vesicular traffic), and varied intracellular or junctional signaling entities 32. Nuclear contributions (e.g.,
transcriptional) are also relevant in establishing gross or refined morphologies but their varied effects are generally
viewed as being more indirect.
Using rat primary hippocampal neurons, we here reveal that increasing PalmD levels heightens dendritic branching,
while decreasing PalmD has the opposite effect. PalmD has been suggested to engage in shaping membranes,
potentially by enhancing their curvature while facilitating intracellular interactions with actin-based processes 19,20. Such
a possibility is consistent with properties ascribed to related family members of PalmD such as paralemmin 33-36, for
which C-terminal palmitoylation and thereby enhanced membrane localization was indicated to promote neuronal
process complexity. Recently, PalmD was reported to promote process formation in the basal progenitor cells of the
mammalian neocortex 20. In that work, PalmD bearing a C-terminal Caax motif was proposed to achieve membrane
localization via Caax palmitoylation in line with its activity in process formation. Our findings were instead derived from
differentiated rat hippocampal and cortical neurons. They indicate that even a PalmD isoform lacking the C-terminal
Caax motif (isoform having four terminal KKVI residues instead 20,37) remained robustly capable of advancing dendritic
branching. In the neuronal context, one possibility is that PalmD lacking its C-terminal Caax motif might still become
palmitoylated or otherwise lipidated elsewhere within its structure. This could enable PalmD’s presence and interactions
at presumptive or forming dendritic membranes to advance branching processes. Alternatively, a fraction of PalmD
might become membrane localized through its direct association with Pdlim5 or other potential membrane associated
binding partners. Membrane localization was artifically reflected here using an experimental approach we earlier
devised (GLS assay) 7

. In it, we targeted Pdlim5 to the Golgi and demonstrated co-targeting of PalmD, that is, Palm D
came along for the ride. In normal neuronal contexts, the PDZ-domain of Pdlim5 is capable of binding to multiple
proteins bearing PDZ-motifs, presumably including that proportion of delta-catenin at dendritic membranes 7
. Other
possibilities to consider as tethers to the membrane-cytoskeleton include adducin 20, as well as potentially indirect
interactions of PalmD with alpha-actinin or cortactin (see below). In all cases, while beyond the scope of our report here,
future work in the field is required to address PalmD’s downstream mechanisms of action, inclusive of its indirect
associations with the inner dendritic membrane or with relevant cytoskeletal elements.
Using multiple orthogonal tests, we provide evidence of PalmD’s association with Pdlim5, a scaffold that we earlier
characterized in association with delta-catenin 7

. Each of these three proteins enhance dendrite branching when
exogenously expressed alone, and conversely, the knockdown of each individual gene product alone leads to neurons
having a greatly reduced presence of dendritic processes. delta-Catenin is thought to promote dendrite branching in
part through inhibition of the small-GTPase RhoA 38-41, which we have likewise indicated is the case for Pdlim5 7
. Given
that PalmD associates with Pdlim5, there is the possibility that PalmD’s effects may likewise involve RhoA or another
small-GTPase. Further potential links of PalmD to cytoskeletal modulation revolve around the presence of additional
associated proteins in complex with Pdlim5 or with delta-catenin. For example, associations based upon the respective
interactions of Plim5 and delta-catenin with the potent cytoskeletal regulators alpha-actinin 15,16 and cortactin 40,41, each