known to contribute to the production or maintenance of cellular processes. Thus, while conjectural at this stage, a
number of possible downstream mechanisms of action could be proposed based upon established associations of
PalmD’s direct or indirect protein partners.
Our prior work 7 and that of others 41 outlines what could be a key upstream pathway that impinges on the
Pdlim5:PalmD complex revealed here, with consequent effects upon gross dendritic morphology. Specifically, Pdlim5’s
(and thereby PalmD’s) association with delta-catenin is determined by a “phospho-switch” at the very C-terminus of
delta-catenin. As reflected in this report’s Graphical Abstract, the phosphorylation of delta-catenin is responsive to
upstream glutamate signaling via the neuronal mGluR5 receptor and consequent activation of Cdk5 kinase 7
. Even as
future work will be needed to precisely identify the cytoskeletal players downstream of the delta-catenin:Pdlim5:PalmD
complex, we speculate as noted the direct involvement of cortactin, alpha-actinin4, and RhoA inhibition, as well as the
spectrin network and membrane-curvature agents. In summary, we unveil here a novel Pdlim5:PalmD complex that
associates with delta-catenin, which through functional interdependencies, promotes dendritic branching-morphology
required in development and is aberrant (see Introduction) in multiple pathological contexts.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.
We thank past lab member Ryan Baumert PhD for being instrumental in initiating our group’s work upon dendrite
morphology 7

. For helpful discussion we thank the following primary investigators and the members of their labs:
Malgosia Kloc PhD, Rachel Miller PhD, and Jaeil Park PhD. Use of the A1-Nikon (confocal images) was made possible via
the UT MDACC Department of Genetics NIH Instrumentation Grant 1S10OD024976-01 (AP). Assistance with DNA
sequencing was provided from the National Cancer Institute Core Grant CA-16672 to UT MDACC. This work was
supported by NIH 1RO1MH115717 (PDM & MNW). MNW acknowledges an endowment from the William Wheless III
Professorship, and PDM acknowledges an Ashbel Smith Professorship.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS.
YS, PDM and MNW planned the project. YS analyzed the data in communication with PM and MNW. YS conducted the
bulk of the experiments, with LLM and MNW preparing the rat primary hippocampal and cortical cultures. MD
undertook the proximity ligation assays of Pdlim5 with PalmD, and ascertained their endogenous localizations via
immunofluorescence, with assistance from LLM and MNW. APH assisted with advising YS and the laboratory on imaging.
The manuscript was written by YS and PDM with consistent input from MNW. All authors read and approved
submission of the final version of the manuscript.