FIGURE TITLES & LEGENDS.
Figure 1. Pdlim5 is a modulator of dendritic branching
A. The images depict rat hippocampal neurons at different developmental stages (DIV1, DIV3, DIV5, DIV7, and DIV9). The
neurons are stained for endogenous Pdlim5 (shown in green) and the NeuN marker (shown in red), a marker for
neuronal nuclei. Images are representative of 2 biological replicates.
B. A diagram illustrating the major subdomains of Pdlim5. The N-terminus contains a PDZ domain (amino acids 1 to 85,
shown in orange), followed by a domain of unknown function (DUF, amino acids 212 to 305, shown in cyan), and at the
C-terminus, three LIM domains (amino acids 413 to 591, shown in green).
C. Immunofluorescent images demonstrating the effects on neuronal morphology of expressing GFP (negative control),
Pdlim5, or siRNA constructs targeting the knockdown of Pdlim5. The images reveal a loss of neuronal complexity in cells
subjected to Pdlim5 siRNA-mediated knockdown (siRNA992, siRNA993), while exogenous expression of Pdlim5 increases
branching. Representative images of three biological replicates.
D. Sholl analysis of neurons under the conditions: negative control (GFP), Pdlim5 expression, and Pdlim5 siRNA-mediated
knock down. Sholl analysis scores the number of dendrites that intersect a series of evenly spaced concentric rings
(generated digitally during data processing) that radiate out from the cell-body/ soma. The analysis indicates that
compared to GFP-expressing cells (blue line), neurons exogenously expressing Pdlim5 (orange line) exhibited a
significant increase in the number of dendrites. Conversely, knockdown of Pdlim5 using siRNA (siRNA992, gray line;
siRNA993, yellow line) shows loss of neuronal processes. Data points are the average values (n≥15 neurons) with error
bars indicating standard error of the mean (SEM). The significance was assessed using a two-way ANOVA with
Bonferroni post-hoc analysis. Scale bars in the images represent 20 μm and 50 μm as indicated.
Figure 2. PalmD a novel partner of Pdlim5
A. The image represents the colocalizations of Pdlim5 (shown in red) and PalmD (shown in green) in rat hippocampal
neurons at DIV4. Gross colocalization is indicated by the overlap color yellow in regions where both proteins are present
within the same cellular compartment. Quantitation in Panel 2B.
B. The mean Pearson's coefficient was calculated to quantify the extent of colocalization between Pdlim5 and PalmD in
neurites. The value 0.65 suggests significant (but not complete) linear correlation of Pdlim5 and PalmD colocalization
within neurites. Two biological replicates were evaluated with similar outcomes (one shown), with data from ≥5 neurons
each. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean (SEM). Each dot in the graph represents one neuron.
C. Immunofluorescent image displays the results of a proximity ligation assay (PLA) of rat hippocampal neurons at DIV4,
where the red-colored puncta indicate the positive reaction produced when antibodies to Pdlim5 and PalmD were
employed. White arrows point to examples of positive (red) puncta. Quantitation in Panel 2D.
D. The quantification of PLA puncta per cell observed in processes is plotted. Antibodies employed against endogenous
Pdlim5 or PalmD alone served as negative controls, while the established endogenous complex of Pdlim5:delta-Catenin
served as positive control. The data was collected from ≥5 neurons, with each dot representing one neuron. Three
biological replicates were evaluated with similar outcomes (one shown). The error bars represent the standard error of
the mean (SEM), and the statistical significance, determined using one-way ANOVA, is indicated as P ≤ 0.0001 (****).
E. The bar graphs compare the distribution of the Pdlim5 and PalmD proteins in different subcellular compartments,
namely soma, neurites, and nucleus, in rat primary hippocampal neurons at two different developmental stages (DIV1
and DIV5). The relative fluorescence intensity for Pdlim5 and PalmD was quantified using ImageJ software. The data was
obtained from 10 neurons, with each dot in the bar graph representing data from a single neuron. The error bars
indicate the standard error of the mean (SEM). To determine the statistical significance, a one-way ANOVA analysis was
performed using GraphPad Prism software. The levels of significance are indicated as **** for P ≤ 0.0001 and *** for P <