0.05, n≥10 neurons. Relative to the nucleus, this signifies high statistical significance of the observed subcellular
localizations of both Pdlim5 and PalmD to neurites and soma in rat hippocampal neurons.

Figure 3. PalmD associates with Pdlim5
A. Immunoblots displaying the endogenous pull-down of Pdlim5 followed by PalmD blotting. Since PalmD and Pdlim5
have similar sizes (approximately 70kD), separate gels were used for blotting of Pdlim5 versus PalmD. n= 3 biological
replicates.
B. Quantitation by densitometric analysis (Image J software) of co-immunoprecipitations (co-Ips). n= 3 biological
replicates of DIV9 rat primary cortical neurons. Each replicate utilized six 10cm dishes containing 2 x 106 cells each (see
Methods). The error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM), and the statistical significance, determined
using one-way ANOVA, is indicated as P ≤ 0.0001 (****).
C. Golgi co-relocalization assays demonstrates that Pdlim5 when fused to a Golgi localization sequence (GLS) exhibits an

ectopic (red) distribution to the Golgi apparatus as expected. Importantly, PalmD (shown in green) colocalizes with GLS-
Pdlim5 to the Golgi. In contrast, when Pdlim5 lacks the GLS, PalmD no longer co-relocalizes with Pdlim5 to the Golgi. n=4

biological replicates, each with analysis of ≥8 cells, scale bar in the images represent 20 μm. HT-22 cells.
D. Calculation shows the Pearson's correlation coefficient for the co-distribution of Pdlim5 and PalmD in the presence

versus absence of the GLS-tag upon Pdlim5. The level of statistical significance is indicated as ****, which signifies a p-
value of ≤ 0.0001. The violin plot quartiles represent data ranges and middle dark line represent median, and the

statistical significance, determined using one-way ANOVA, is indicated as P ≤ 0.0001 (****).

Figure 4. PalmD characterization (?) and its functional dependency with Pdlim5:
A. Rat primary hippocampal neurons at the indicated developmental stages (DIV1, DIV3, DIV5, DIV7, and DIV9), are
immuno-stained for endogenous PalmD (shown in green) and the NeuN marker (shown in red), which identifies
neuronal nuclei. n=2 biological replicates. The scale bars in the images indicate 20 μm and 50 μm.
B. These immunofluorescent images illustrate the impact of PalmD exogenous expression versus siRNA-mediated
knockdown of PalmD (siRNA714, siRNA716) on neuronal morphology. PalmD siRNA-mediated knockdown decreases
process complexity, while exogenous expression increases branching morphology. Three biological replicates in each
condition analyzing ≥ 10 neurons. Quantitation present in Panel C.
C. Sholl analysis was conducted to examine the dendrite morphology of neurons under different conditions: namely
negative control (GFP, blue line), PalmD exogenous expression (orange line), and PalmD siRNA-mediated knock down
(siRNA714, green line; siRNA716, yellow line). The analysis demonstrates that neurons overexpressing PalmD exhibit a
significant increase in dendritic complexity, while knockdown of PalmD results in severe reductions. The significance was
assessed using a two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc analysis that varies from P ≤ 0.0001 and P < 0.05, based on
radial distance from the cell soma (compared to cells expressing GFP alone). The error bars represent the standard error
of the mean (SEM). n≥15 neurons in each of three biological replicates.
D. Functional interdependence of Pdlim5 and PalmD. The panel indicates the GFP control condition relative to Pdlim5
exogenous expression, and versus PalmD exogenous expression in the presence of PalmD siRNA-mediated knockdown
(KD). The results suggest an interdependence between Pdlim5 and PalmD in regulating neuronal morphology. Analyzed
≥ 10 neurons in each of three biological replicates. See panel E for quantitation.
E. Sholl analysis was performed to analyze dendrite morphology under different conditions: GFP control, Pdlim5
exogenous expression, and Pdlim5 exogenous expression with concomitant knock down of PalmD (siRNA716). The
analysis reveals that neurons overexpressing Pdlim5 (orange line) exhibit increased numbers of dendrites compared to
control GFP-expressing cells (blue line) (P ≤ 0.0001 and P < 0.05 for the respective regions 20-90 μm and 110-170 μm
from the soma). However, when PalmD siRNA716 is introduced alongside Pdlim5 exogenous expression (gray line), there