is a significant loss of branching function. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM). n≥15 neurons
each from three biological replicates. The significance was assessed using a two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc
analysis.

METHODS.
Neuronal cultures and transfection
Primary hippocampal and cortical neurons were obtained from rat embryos at the 18th day of gestation (E18), following
methodology previously described in 42,43. Subsequent to isolation, the hippocampal neurons were plated in 24-well
tissue-culture plates at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well. To facilitate adhesion, glass coverslips within the wells were
pre-coated with 100 μg/ml poly-D-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich). Cortical neurons were plated at 20 x 106 cells per 10 cm Petri
dish pre-coated with 100 ug/ml poly-D-lysine. The cultured hippocampal neurons were maintained in Neurobasal
Medium (Life Technologies), supplemented with B-27, GlutaMAX, and penicillin-streptomycin (each from Life
Technologies). At 3 days in vitro (DIV), the neurons underwent Lipofectamine 2000 based transfection using the
manufacturer’s protocol (Life Technologies) but employing 1 μg plasmid DNA.
HEK293 cell culture and transfection
HEK293 cells from ATCC (ATCC# CRL-1573) cells were cultured in DMEM cell culture media (Sigma-Aldrich)
supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1x penicillin-streptomycin (Life Technologies). Media change was
performed every other day until the cells reached 80% confluency, after which they were transferred to new culture
dishes. Transfection of the HEK293 cells with exogenous DNA (1 μg) was accomplished using Lipofectamine 2000 as per
the manufacturer's instructions. Transfection took place when the cells reached 50-60% confluency in six-well culture
plates. Co-IPs were conducted as below mentioned.
cDNA constructs
All cDNA constructs were cloned into the backbone of the pCS2 mammalian expression vector. Engineering was
undertaken by Epoch Life Science and/ or the McCrea laboratory. All constructs were confirmed with DNA sequencing.
The full length PalmD-pCMV6-AC-GFP was purchased from Origene (RG203079), and PalmD-GFP was moved into the
pCS2 vector. Pdlim5 was engineered previously in our laboratory 7

. DNA maxi-preps were outsourced to Epoch Life
Sciences. See STAR Methods Key Resources Table for a complete list of constructs and their corresponding epitope tags/
fusions.
siRNAs
To synthesize and validate siRNAs that target Pdlim5 or PalmD, we first identified corresponding 19-nucleotide target
sequences using the siRNA Wizard v3.1 tool from InvivoGen. Two siRNAs were selected for each target to enable the
generation of siRNAs. The siRNA sequences for Pdlim5 were 5ʹ-GCACUGUAUUGUGAGCUAUtt-3ʹ and 5’-
CAACUGUGCUCACUGCAAAtt-3’, while for PalmD they were 5’-GCAUCAGGCAGAACGAAUAtt-3’ and 5’-
CGAGGAUAUCUAUGCUAAUtt-3’.
siRNAs for Pdlim5 and PalmD were purchased from Life Technologies. Individual siRNAs were transfected into
hippocampal neurons using the manufacturer’s Lipofectamine 2000 protocol. Neurons were allowed to grow for 24-48
hours before conducting immunofluorescence assays. Knockdown efficiency of each siRNA was assessed using
immunoctyochemistry with anti-Pdlim5 or anti-PalmD primary antibodies, and IMARIS software was used to quantify the
intensity of immunostained images. Sholl analysis was used to assess the impact upon neuronal morphology (see
below).
Antibodies
Antibodies that recognize specific epitope tags as well as endogenous proteins were obtained commercially. Rabbit
polyclonal anti-Myc epitope-tag (MT) antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology/ CST #2272S), mouse monoclonal anti-Myc
epitope-tag (MT) antibodies (CST #9B11), anti-GFP antibodies (CST #2956 from rabbit and CST #4B10 from mouse), and a
mouse monoclonal anti-FLAG epitope-tag antibody (Sigma #F7425). For the detection of endogenous Pdlim5, two mouse
monoclonal antibodies were utilized: one for the purpose of IP/ immuno-blotting (Thermo Fisher Scientific catalog #
MA5-25915) (Figure 3A and S3A), with a second mouse monoclonal (Sigma-Aldrich catalog # WH0010611M1) used to